
                    TO MY WORTHY AND HONOURED FRIEND
                            NICHOLAS BACON
                       Of _Gillingham_ Esquire.

_Had I not observed that [K]Purblinde men have discoursed well of sight,
and some [L]without issue, excellently of Generation; I that was never
master of any considerable garden, had not attempted this Subject. But
the Earth is the Garden of Nature, and each fruitfull Countrey a
Paradise. Dioscorides made most of his Observations in his march about
with_ Antonius; _and_ Theophrastus _raised his generalities chiefly from
the field_.

  [K] Plempius, Cabeus, _etc_.

  [L] _D. Harvy._

_Beside, we write no Herball, nor can this Volume deceive you, who have
handled the [M]massiest thereof: who know that thre [N]Folio's are yet
too little, and how New Herbals fly from_ America _upon us, from
persevering Enquirers, and [O]old in those singularities, we expect such
Descriptions. Wherein_ [P]England _is now so exact, that it yeelds not
to other Countreys_.

  [M] _Besleri_ Hortus Eystetensis.

  [N] _Bauhini_ Theatrum Botanicum, _etc._

  [O] _My worthy friend M._ Goodier _an ancient and learned Botanist_.

  [P] _As in_ London _and divers parts, whereof we mention none, lest we
      seem to omit any_.

_We pretend not to multiply vegetable divisions by Quincuncial and
Reticulate plants; or erect a new Phytology. The Field of knowledge hath
been so traced, it is hard to spring any thing new. Of old things we
write something new, If truth may receive addition, or envy will have
any thing new; since the Ancients knew the late Anatomicall discoveries,
and_ Hippocrates _the Circulation_.

_You have been so long out of trite learning, that 'tis hard to finde a
subject proper for you; and if you have met with a Sheet upon this, we
have missed our intention. In this multiplicity of writing, bye and
barren Themes are best fitted for invention; Subjects so often
discoursed confine the Imagination, and fix our conceptions unto the
notions of fore-writers. Beside, such Discourses allow excursions, and
venially admit of collaterall truths, though at some distance from their
principals. Wherein if we sometimes take wide liberty, we are not
single, but erre by great [Q]example._

  [Q] Hippocrates de superfoetatione, de dentitione.

_He that will illustrate the excellency of this order, may easily fail
upon so spruce a Subject, wherein we have not affrighted the common
Reader with any other Diagramms, then of it self; and have industriously
declined illustrations from rare and unknown plants._

_Your discerning judgement so well acquainted with that study, will
expect herein no mathematicall truths, as well understanding how few
generalities and [R]Vfinita's there are in nature. How_ Scaliger _hath
found exceptions in most Universals of_ Aristotle _and_ Theophrastus.
_How Botanicall Maximes must have fair allowance, and are tolerably
currant, if not intolerably over-ballanced by exceptions_.

  [R] _Rules without exceptions_.

_You have wisely ordered your vegetable delights, beyond the reach of
exception. The Turks who passt their dayes in Gardens here, will have
Gardens also hereafter, and delighting in Flowers on earth, must have
Lillies and Roses in Heaven. In Garden Delights 'tis not easie to hold a
Mediocrity; that insinuating pleasure is seldome without some extremity.
The Antients venially delighted in flourishing Gardens; Many were
Florists that knew not the true use of a Flower; And in_ Plinies
_dayes none had directly treated of that subject. Some commendably
affected Plantations of venemous Vegetables, some confined their
delights unto single plants, and Cato seemed to dote upon Cabbadge;
While the Ingenuous delight of Tulipists, stands saluted with hard
language, even by their own [S]Professors._

  [S] Tulipo mania, Narrencruiid, Laurenberg. Pet. Hondius. in lib.
      _Belg._

_That in this Garden Discourse, we range into extraneous things, and
many parts of Art and Nature, we follow herein the example of old and
new Plantations, wherein noble spirits contented not themselves with
Trees, but by the attendance of Aviaries, Fish-Ponds, and all variety of
Animals, they made their gardens the Epitome of the earth, and some
resemblance of the secular shows of old._

_That we conjoyn these parts of different Subjects, or that this should
succeed the other; Your judgement will admit without impute of
incongruity; Since the delightfull World comes after death, and Paradise
succeeds the Grave. Since the verdant state of things is the Symbole of
the Resurrection, and to flourish in the state of Glory, we must first
be sown in corruption. Beside the ancient practise of Noble Persons, to
conclude in Garden-Graves, and Urnes themselves of old, to be wrapt up
flowers and garlands._

Nullam sine venia placuisse eloquium, _is more sensibly understood by
Writers, then by Readers; nor well apprehended by either, till works
have hanged out like_ Apelles _his Pictures; wherein even common eyes
will finde something for emendation._

_To wish all Readers of your abilities, were unreasonably to multiply
the number of Scholars beyond the temper of these times. But unto this
ill-judging age, we charitably desire a portion of your equity,
judgement, candour, and ingenuity; wherein you are so rich, as not to
lose by diffusion. And being a flourishing branch of that [T]Noble
Family, unto which we owe so much observance, you are not new set, but
long rooted in such perfection; whereof having had so lasting
confirmation in your worthy conversation, constant amity, and
expression; and knowing you a serious Student in the highest_ arcana's
_of Nature; with much excuse we bring these low delights, and poor
maniples to your Treasure_.

  [T] _Of the most worthy Sr_ Edmund Bacon _prime Baronet, my true and
      noble Friend._

                           _Your affectionate Friend,
                                     and Servant_,
                                               THOMAS BROWNE.

_Norwich, May 1._




THE GARDEN OF CYRUS

Or, The Quincuncial, Lozenge, or Net-work Plantations of the Ancients,
Artificially, Naturally, Mystically considered.




CHAPTER I


That _Vulcan_ gave arrows unto _Apollo_ and _Diana_ the fourth day after
their Nativities, according to Gentile Theology, may passe for no blinde
apprehension of the Creation of the Sunne and Moon, in the work of the
fourth day; When the diffused light contracted into Orbes, and shooting
rayes, of those Luminaries. Plainer Descriptions there are from Pagan
pens, of the creatures of the fourth day; While the divine
Philosopher[107] unhappily omitteth the noblest part of the third; And
_Ovid_ (whom many conceive to have borrowed his description from
_Moses_) coldly deserting the remarkable account of the text, in three
words,[108] describeth this work of the third day; the vegetable
creation, and first ornamental Scene of nature; the primitive food of
animals, and first story of Physick, in Dietetical conservation.

  [107] Plato in Timaeo.

  [108] fronde tegi silvas.

For though Physick may pleade high, from the medicall act of God, in
casting so deep a sleep upon our first Parent; And Chirurgery[109] finde
its whole art, in that one passage concerning the Rib of _Adam_, yet is
there no rivality with Garden contrivance and Herbery. For if Paradise
were planted the third day of the Creation, as wiser Divinity
concludeth, the Nativity thereof was too early for Horoscopie; Gardens
were before Gardiners, and but some hours after the earth.

  [109] +diairesis+ _in opening the flesh_. +exairesis+, _in taking
        out the rib_. +synthesis+,_ in closing up the part again_.

Of deeper doubt is its Topography, and locall designation, yet being the
primitive garden, and without much controversie[110] seated in the East;
it is more then probable the first curiosity, and cultivation of plants,
most nourished in those quarters. And since the Ark of _Noah_ first
toucht upon some mountains of _Armenia,_ the planting art arose again in
the East, and found its revolution not far from the place of its
Nativity, about the Plains of those Regions. And if _Zoroaster_ were
either _Cham_, _Chus_, or _Mizraim_, they were early proficients
therein, who left (as _Pliny_ delivereth) a work of Agriculture.

  [110] _For some there is from the ambiguity of the word_ Mikedem,
        _whether_ ab oriente _or_ a principio.

However the account of the Pensill or hanging gardens of _Babylon_, if
made by _Semiramis_, the third or fourth from _Nimrod_, is of no
slender antiquity; which being not framed upon ordinary level of ground,
but raised upon pillars admitting under-passages, we cannot accept as
the first _Babylonian_ Gardens; But a more eminent progress and
advancement in that art, then any that went before it: Somewhat
answering or hinting the old Opinion concerning Paradise it self, with
many conceptions elevated above the plane of the Earth.

_Nebuchodonosor_, whom some will have to be the famous _Syrian_ King of
_Diodorus_, beautifully repaired that City; and so magnificently built
his hanging gardens;[111] that from succeeding Writers he had the honour
of the first. From whence over-looking _Babylon_, and all the Region
about it, he found no circumscription to the eye of his ambition, till
over-delighted with the bravery of this Paradise; in his melancholy
metamorphosis, he found the folly of that delight, and a proper
punishment, in the contrary habitation, in wilde plantations and
wandrings of the fields.

  [111] Josephus.

The _Persian_ Gallants who destroyed this Monarchy, maintained their
Botanicall bravery. Unto whom we owe the very name of Paradise:
wherewith we meet not in Scripture before the time of _Solomon_, and
conceived originally _Persian_. The word for that disputed Garden,
expressing in the Hebrew no more then a Field enclosed, which from the
same Root is content to derive a garden and a Buckler.

_Cyrus_ the elder brought up in Woods and Mountains, when time and power
enabled, pursued the dictate of his education, and brought the treasures
of the field into rule and circumscription, So nobly beautifying the
hanging Gardens of _Babylon_, that he was also thought to be the authour
thereof.

_Ahasuerus_ (whom many conceive to have been _Artaxerxes Longimanus_) in
the Countrey and City of Flowers,[112] and in an open Garden,
entertained his Princes and people, while _Vasthi_ more modestly treated
the Ladies within the Palace thereof.

  [112] Sushan in Susiana.

But if (as some opinion) [SN: Plutarch _in the life of_ Artaxerxes.]
King _Ahasuerus_ were _Artaxerxes Mnemon_, that found a life and reign
answerable unto his great memory, our magnified _Cyrus_ was his second
brother: who gave the occasion of that memorable work, and almost
miraculous retrait of _Xenophon_. A person of high spirit and honour,
naturally a King, though fatally prevented by the harmlesse chance of
_post_-geniture: Not only a Lord of Gardens, but a manuall planter
thereof: disposing his trees like his armies in regular ordination. So
that while old _Laertas_ hath found a name in _Homer_ for pruning
hedges, and clearing away thorns and bryars; while King _Attalus_ lives
for his poysonous plantations of _Aconites_, Henbane, Hellebore, and
plants hardly admitted within the walls of Paradise; While many of the
Ancients do poorly live in the single names of Vegetables; All stories
do look upon _Cyrus_, as the splendid and regular planter.

According whereto _Xenophon_[113] describeth his gallant plantation at
_Sardis_, thus rendered by _Stobaeus, Arbores pari intervallo sitas,
rectos ordines, et omnia perpulchre in Quincuncem directa_.[114] Which
we shall take for granted as being accordingly rendered by the most
elegant of the Latines;[115] and by no made term, but in use before by
_Varro_. That is, the rows and orders so handsomely disposed; or five
trees so set together, that a regular angularity, and through prospect,
was left on every side. Owing this name not only unto the Quintuple
number of Trees, but the figure declaring that number, which being
doubled at the angle, makes up the Letter +Chi+, that is the
Emphatical decussation, or fundamental figure.

  [113] Xenophon in Oeconomico.

  [114] +Kala men ta dendra, di isou de ta pephyteumena, orthoi de
        hoi stichoi ton dendron, eugonea de panta kalos.+

  [115] Cicero iae Cat. Major.

Now though in some ancient and modern practice the _area_ or decussated
plot, might be a perfect square, answerable to a _Tuscan Pedestal_, and
the _Quinquernio_ or Cinque-point of a die; wherein by Diagonal lines
the intersection was regular; accommodable unto Plantations of large
growing Trees; and we must not denie our selves the advantage of this
order; yet shall we chiefly insist upon that of _Curtius_[116] and
_Porta_, in their brief description hereof. Wherein the _decussis_ is
made within a longilateral square, with oposite angles, acute and obtuse
at the intersection; and so upon progression making a _Rhombus_ or
Lozenge figuration, which seemeth very agreeable unto the Original
figure; Answerable whereunto we observe the decussated characters in
many consulary coynes, and even in those of _Constantine_ and his Sons,
which pretend their pattern in the Sky; the crucigerous Ensigne carried
this figure, not transversly or rectangularly intersected, but in a
decussation, after the form of an _Andrean_ or _Burgundian_ cross, which
answereth this description.

  [116] Benedict Curtius de Hortis. Bapt. Portainvilla.

Where by the way we shall decline the old Theme, so traced by antiquity
of crosses and crucifixion: Whereof some being right, and of one single
peece without traversion or transome, do little advantage our subject.
Nor shall we take in the mystical _Tau_, or the Crosse of our blessed
Saviour, which having in some descriptions an _Empedon_ or crossing
foot-stay, made not one single transversion. And since the Learned
_Lipsius_ hath made some doubt even of the crosse of St. _Andrew_,
since some Martyrological Histories deliver his death by the general
Name of a crosse, and _Hippolitus_ will have him suffer by the sword; we
should have enough to make out the received Crosse of that Martyr. Nor
shall we urge the _labarum_, and famous Standard of _Constantine_, or
make further use thereof, then as the first letters in the Name of our
Saviour Christ, in use among Christians, before the dayes of
_Constantine_, to be observed in Sepulchral Monuments of Martyrs,[117]
in the Reign of _Adrian_, and _Antoninus_; and to be found in the
Antiquities of the Gentiles, before the advent of Christ, as in the
Medal of King _Ptolomy_, signed with the same characters, and might be
the beginning of some word or name, which Antiquaries have not hit on.

  [117] _Of_ Marius, Alexander, Roma Sotterranea.

We will not revive the mysterious crosses of _AEgypt_, with circles on
their heads, in the breast of _Serapis_, and the hands of their Geniall
spirits, not unlike the character of _Venus_, and looked on by ancient
Christians, with relation unto Christ. Since however they first began,
the AEgyptians thereby expressed the processe and motion of the spirit of
the world, and the diffusion thereof upon the Celestiall and Elementall
nature; implyed by a circle and right-lined intersection. A secret in
their Telesmes and magicall Characters among them. Though he that
considereth the plain crosse[118] upon the head of the Owl in the
Laterane Obelisk, or the crosse[119] erected upon a pitcher diffusing
streams of water into two basins, with sprinkling branches in them, and
all described upon a two-footed Altar, as in the Hieroglyphicks of the
brazen Table of _Bembus_: will hardly decline all thought of Christian
signality in them.

  [118] _Wherein the lower part is some what longer, as defined by_ Upton
       de studio militari, _and_ Johannes de Bado Aureo, cum comment.
       clariss. et doctiss. Bi saei.

  [119] Casal. de Ritibus. Bosio nella Trionfante croce.

We shall not call in the Hebrew _Tenapha_, or ceremony of their
Oblations, waved by the priest unto the four quarters of the world,
after the form of a cross; as in the peace-offerings. And if it were
clearly made out what is remarkably delivered from the Traditions of
the Rabbins, that as the Oyle was powred coronally or circularly upon
the head of Kings, so the High-Priest was anointed decussatively or in
the form of a X; though it could not escape a typical thought of Christ,
from mystical considerators; yet being the conceit is Hebrew, we should
rather expect its verification from Analogy in that language, then to
confine the same unto the unconcerned Letters of _Greece_, or make it
out by the characters of _Cadmus_ or _Palamedes_.

Of this Quincuncial Ordination the Ancients practised, much discoursed
little; and the Moderns have nothing enlarged; which he that more nearly
considereth, in the form of its square _Rhombus_, and decussation, with
the several commodities, mysteries, parallelismes, and resemblances,
both in Art and Nature, shall easily discern the elegancy of this order.

That this was in some wayes of practice in diverse and distant Nations,
hints or deliveries there are from no slender Antiquity. In the hanging
Gardens of _Babylon_, from _Abydenus_, _Eusebius_, and others,
_Curtius_[120] describeth this rule of decussation. In the memorable
Garden of _Alcinous_ anciently conceived an original phancy, from
Paradise, mention there is of well contrived order; For so hath
_Didymus_ and _Eustachius_ expounded the emphatical word. _Diomedes_
describing the Rurall possions of his Father, gives account in the same
Language of Trees orderly planted. And _Ulysses_ being a boy was
promised by his father fourty Fig-trees, and fifty rows of vines,[121]
producing all kind of grapes.

  [120] Decussatio ipsa jucundum ac peramaenum conspectum praebuit.
        _Cart._ Hortar. _l._ 6.

  [121] +orchoi, stichoi ampelon, phyton stichos, e kata taxin phyteia.+
        Phavorinus Philoxenus.

That the Eastern Inhabitants of _India_, made use of such order, even in
open Plantations, is deducible from _Theophrastus_; who describing the
trees whereof they made their garments, plainly delivereth that they
were planted +kat orchous+, and in such order that at a distance
men would mistake them for Vineyards. The same seems confirmed in
_Greece_ from a singular expression in _Aristotle_[122] concerning the
order of Vines, delivered by a military term representing the orders of
Souldiers, which also confirmeth the antiquity of this form yet used in
vineal plantations.

  [122] +systadas ampelon+. _Polit. 7._

That the same was used in Latine plantations is plainly confirmed from
the commending penne of _Varro_, _Quintilian_, and handsome Description
of _Virgil_.[123]

  [123] Indulge ordinibus, nec secius omnis in unguem Arboribus positis,
        secto via limite quadret. _Georg. 2._

That the first Plantations not long after the Floud were disposed after
this manner, the generality and antiquity of this order observed in
Vineyards, and Wine Plantations, affordeth some conjecture. And since
from judicious enquiry, _Saturn_ who divided the world between his three
sonnes, who beareth a Sickle in his hand, who taught the Plantations of
Vines, the setting, grafting of trees, and the best part of Agriculture,
is discovered to be _Noah_, whether this early dispersed Husbandry in
Vineyards, had not its Original in that Patriarch, is no such
Paralogical doubt.

And if it were clear that this was used by _Noah_ after the Floud, I
could easily beleeve it was in use before it; Not willing to fix such
ancient inventions no higher original then _Noah_; Nor readily
conceiving those aged _Heroes_, whose diet was vegetable, and only, or
chiefly consisted in the fruits of the earth, were much deficient in
their splendid cultivations; or after the experience of fifteen hundred
years, left much for future discovery in Botanical Agriculture. Nor
fully perswaded that Wine was the invention of _Noah_, that fermented
Liquors, which often make themselves, so long escaped their Luxury or
experience; that the first sinne of the new world was no sin of the old.
That _Cain_ and _Abel_ were the first that offered Sacrifice; or because
the Scripture is silent that _Adam_ or _Isaac_ offered none at all.

Whether _Abraham_ brought up in the first planting Countrey, observed
not some rule hereof, when he planted a grove at _Beer-sheba_; or
whether at least a like ordination were not in the Garden of _Solomon_,
probability may contest. Answerably unto the wisedom of that eminent
Botanologer, and orderly disposer of all his other works. Especially
since this was one peece of Gallantry, wherein he pursued the specious
part of felicity, according to his own description. I made me Gardens
and Orchards, and planted Trees in them of all kindes of fruit. I made
me Pools of water, to water therewith the wood that bringeth forth
Trees,[124] which was no ordinary plantation, if according to the
_Targum_, or _Chaldee Paraphrase_, it contained all kindes of Plants,
and some fetched as far as _India_; And the extent thereof were from the
wall of _Jerusalem_ unto the water of _Siloah_.

  [124] _Eccles._ 2.

And if _Jordan_ were but _Jaar Eden_, that is, the River of _Eden,
Genesar_ but _Gansar_ or the prince of Gardens; and it could be made
out, that the Plain of _Jordan_ were watered not comparatively, but
causally, and because it was the Paradise of God, as the learned
_Abramas_[125] hinteth, he was not far from the Prototype and originall
of Plantations. And since even in Paradise it self, the tree of
knowledge was placed in the middle of the Garden, whatever was the
ambient figure; there wanted not a centre and rule of decussation.
Whether the groves and sacred Plantations of Antiquity, were not thus
orderly placed, either by _quaternio's_, or quintuple ordinations, may
favourably be doubted. For since they were so methodical in the
constitutions of their temples, as to observe the due scituation,
aspect, manner, form, and order in Architectonicall relations, whether
they were not as distinct in their groves and Plantations about them, in
form and _species_ respectively unto their Deities, is not without
probability of conjecture. And in their groves of the Sunne this was a
fit number, by multiplication to denote the dayes of the year; and might
Hieroglyphically speak as much, as the mystical _Statua_ of _Janus_[126]
in the Language of his fingers. And since they were so critical in the
number of his horses, the strings of his Harp, and rayes about his head,
denoting the orbes of heaven, the Seasons and Moneths of the Yeare:
witty Idolatry would hardly be flat in other appropriations.

  [125] Vet. Testamenti Pharus.

  [126] _Which King_ Numa _set up with his fingers so disposed that they
        numerically denoted 365._ Pliny.




CHAPTER II


Nor was this only a form of practise in Plantations, but found imitation
from high Antiquity, in sundry artificial contrivances and manual
operations. For to omit the position of squared stones, _cuncatim_ or
_wedgwise_ in the walls of _Roman_ and _Gothick_ buildings; and the
_lithostrata_ or figured pavements of the ancients, which consisted not
all of square stones, but were divided into triquetrous segments,
honeycombs, and sexangular figures, according to _Vitruvius_; The
squared stones and bricks in ancient fabricks, were placed after this
order. And two above or below conjoyned by a middle stone or _Plinthus_,
observable in the ruines of _Forum Nervae,_ the _Mausoleum_ of
_Augustus_, the Pyramid of _Cestius_, and the sculpture draughts of the
larger Pyramids of AEgypt. And therefore in the draughts of eminent
fabricks, Painters do commonly imitate this order in the lines of their
description.

In the Laureat draughts of sculpture and picture, the leaves and foliate
works are commonly thus contrived, which is but in imitation of the
_Pulvinaria_, and ancient pillow-work, observable in _Ionick_ peeces,
about columns, temples and altars. To omit many other analogies, in
Architectonicall draughts, which art itself is founded upon fives,[127]
having its subject, and most gracefull peeces divided by this number.

  [127] _Of a structure five parts_, Fundamentum, parietes, Aperturae,
        Compartitio tectum, _Leo. Alberti. Five Columes_, Tuscan, Dorick,
        Ionick, Corinthian, Compound. _Five different intercolumniations_,
        Pycnostylos, dystylos, Systylos, Areostylos, Eustylos. _Vitru._

The Triumphal Oval, and Civicall Crowns of Laurel, Oake, and Myrtle,
when fully made, were pleated after this order. And to omit the Crossed
Crowns of Christian Princes; what figure that was which _Anastatius_
described upon the head of _Leo_ the third; or who first brought in the
Arched Crown; That of Charles the great, (which seems the first
remarkably closed Crown), was framed after this manner;[128] with an
intersection in the middle from the main crossing barres, and the
interspaces, unto the frontal circle, continued by handsome
network-plates, much after this order. Whereon we shall not insist,
because from greater Antiquity, and practice of consecration, we meet
with the radiated, and starry Crown, upon the head of _Augustus_, and
many succeeding Emperors. Since the Armenians and Parthians had a
peculiar royall Capp; And the Grecians from _Alexander_ another kinde of
diadem. And even Diadems themselves were but fasciations, and handsome
ligatures, about the heads of Princes; nor wholly omitted in the mitrall
Crown, which common picture seems to set too upright and forward upon
the head of _Aaron_: Worne[129] sometimes singly, or doubly by Princes,
according to their Kingdomes; and no more to be expected from two Crowns
at once, upon the head of _Ptolomy_. And so easily made out when
historians tell us, some bound up wounds, some hanged themselves with
diadems.

  [128] Uti constat ex pergamena apud Chifflet; in _B. R._ Bruxelli, et
        Icon. _f._ Stradae.

  [129] Macc, 1. 11.

The beds of the antients were corded somewhat after this fashion: That
is not directly, as ours at present, but obliquely, from side to side,
and after the manner of network; whereby they strengthened the spondae or
bedsides, and spent less cord in the work: as is demonstrated by
_Blancanus_.[130]

  [130] Aristot. Mechan. Quaest.

And as they lay in crossed beds, so they sat upon seeming crosse legg'd
seats: in which form the noblest thereof were framed; Observable in the
triumphall seats, the _sella curulis_, or _AEdyle Chayres_, in the coyns
of _Cestius_, _Sylla_, and _Julius_. That they sat also crosse legg'd
many noble draughts declare; and in this figure the sitting gods and
goddesses are drawn in medalls and medallions. And beside this kinde of
work in Retiarie and hanging tectures, in embroderies, and eminent
needle-works; the like is obvious unto every eye in glass-windows. Nor
only in Glassie contrivances, but also in Lattice and Stone-work,
conceived in the Temple of _Solomon_; wherein the windows are termed
_fenestrae reticulatae_, or lights framed like nets.[131] And agreeable
unto the Greek expression concerning Christ in the _Canticles_,[132]
looking through the nets, which ours hath rendered, he looketh forth at
the windows, shewing himselfe through the lattesse; that is, partly seen
and unseen, according to the visible and invisible side of his nature.
To omit the noble reticulate work, in the chapters of the pillars of
_Solomon_, with Lillies, and Pomegranats upon a network ground; and the
_Craticula_ or grate through which the ashes fell in the altar of burnt
offerings.

  [131] +diktyota.+

  [132] _Cant._ 2.

That the networks and nets of antiquity were little different in the
form from ours at present, is confirmable from the nets in the hands of
the Retiarie gladiators, the proper combatants with the secutores. To
omit the ancient Conopeion or gnatnet of the AEgyptians, the inventors of
that Artifice: the rushey labyrinths of _Theocritus_; the nosegaynets,
which hung from the head under the nostrils of Princes; and that uneasie
metaphor of _Reticulum Jecoris_, which some expound the lobe, we the
caule above the liver. As for that famous network[133] of _Vulcan_,
which inclosed _Mars_ and _Venus_, and caused that unextinguishable
laugh in heaven; since the gods themselves could not discern it, we
shall not prie into it; Although why _Vulcan_ bound them, _Neptune_
loosed them, and _Apollo_ should first discover them, might afford no
vulgar mythologie. Heralds have not omitted this order or imitation
thereof, whiles they Symbollically adorn their Scuchions with Mascles,
Fusils and Saltyrs,[134] and while they disposed the figures of Ermins,
and vaired coats in this Quincuncial method.

  [133] +Asbestos d ar' enorto gelos.+ Hom.

  [134] De armis Scaccatis, Masculatis, invectis fuselatis vide Spelm.
        Aspilog. et Upton. cum erudit. Bissaeo.

The same is not forgot by Lapidaries while they cut their gemms
pyramidally, or by aequicrural triangles. Perspective pictures, in their
Base, Horison, and lines of distances, cannot escape these Rhomboidall
decussations. Sculptors in their strongest shadows, after this order doe
draw their double Haches. And the very _Americans_ do naturally fall
upon it, in their neat and curious textures, which is also observed in
the elegant artifices of _Europe_. But this is no law unto the wool of
the neat _Retiarie_ Spider, which seems to weave without transversion,
and by the union of right lines to make out a continued surface, which
is beyond the common art of Textury, and may still nettle _Minerva_ the
goddesse of that mystery.[135] And he that shall hatch the little seeds,
either found in small webs, or white round Egges, carried under the
bellies of some Spiders, and behold how at their first production in
boxes, they will presently fill the same with their webbs, may observe
the early, and untaught finger of nature, and how they are natively
provided with a stock, sufficient for such Texture.

  [135] _As in the contention between_ Minerva _and_ Arachne.

The Rurall charm against _Dodder_, _Tetter_, and strangling weeds, was
contrived after this order, while they placed a chalked Tile at the four
corners, and one in the middle of their fields, which though ridiculous
in the intention, was rationall in the contrivance, and a good way to
diffuse the magick through all parts of the _Area_.

Somewhat after this manner they ordered the little stones in the old
game of _Pentalithismus_, or casting up five stones to catch them on the
back of their hand. And with some resemblance hereof, the _Proci_ or
Prodigal Paramours disposed their men, when they played _Penelope_.[136]
For being themselves an hundred and eight, they set fifty four stones on
either side, and one in the middle, which they called _Penelope_, which
he that hit was Master of the game.

  [136] _In_ Eustachius.

In Chesse-boards and Tables we yet finde Pyramids and Squares, I wish we
had their true and ancient description, far different from ours, or the
_Chet mat_ of the _Persians_, and might continue some elegant
remarkables, as being an invention as High as _Hermes_ the Secretary of
_Osyris_,[137] figuring the whole world, the motion of the Planets, with
Eclipses of Sunne and Moon.

  [137] Plato.

Physicians are not without the use of this decussation in several
operations, in ligatures and union of dissolved continuities. Mechanicks
make use hereof in forcipal Organs, and Instruments of incision; wherein
who can but magnifie the power of decussation, inservient to contrary
ends, solution and consolidation, union, and division, illustrable from
_Aristotle_ in the old _Nucifragium_ or Nutcraker, and the Instruments
of Evulsion, compression or incision; which consisting of two _Vectes_
or armes, converted towards each other, the innitency and stresse being
made upon the _hypomochlion_ or fulciment in the decussation, the
greater compression is made by the union of two impulsors.

                 -----    -----    -----    -----    -----
        _Hast._ |     |  |     |  |     |  |     |  |     |
                 -----    -----    -----    -----    -----
                     -----    -----    -----    -----
        _Pr._       |     |  |     |  |     |  |     |
                     -----    -----    -----    -----
                 -----    -----    -----    -----    -----
        _Tr._   |     |  |     |  |     |  |     |  |     |
                 -----    -----    -----    -----    -----

The _Romane Batalia_[138] was ordered after this manner, whereof as
sufficiently known _Virgil_ hath left but an hint, and obscure
intimation. For thus were the maniples and cohorts of the _Hastiti_,
_Principes_ and _Triarii_ placed in their bodies, wherein consisted the
strength of the _Romane battle_. By this Ordination they readily fell
into each other; the _Hastati_ being pressed, handsomely retired into
the intervals of the _principes_, these into that of the _Triarii_,
which making as it were a new body, might joyntly renew the battle,
wherein consisted the secret of their successes. And therefore it was
remarkably singular[139] in the battle of _Africa_, that _Scipio_
fearing a rout from the Elephants the Enemy, left not the _Principes_ in
their alternate distances, whereby the Elephants passing the vacuities
of the _Hastati_, might have run upon them, but drew his battle into
right order, and leaving the passages bare, defeated the mischief
intended by the Elephants. Out of this figure were made two remarkable
forms of Battle, the _Cuneus_ and _Forceps_, or the Sheare and wedge
Battles, each made of half a _Rhombus_, and but differenced by position.
The wedge invented to break or worke into a body, the _forceps_ to
environ and defeat the power thereof composed out of selectest Souldiery
and disposed into the form of an V, wherein receiving the wedge, it
inclosed it on both sides. After this form the famous _Narses_[140]
ordered his battle against the _Franks_, and by this figure the _Almans_
were enclosed, and cut in peeces.

  [138] _In the disposure of the Legions in the Wars of the Republike,
        before the division of the Legion into ten cohorts by the
        Emperours._ Salmas. _in his Epistle a Mounsieur de Peyresc. & de
        Re militari Romanorum_.

  [139] Polybius Appianus.

  [140] Agathius Ammianus.

The _Rhombus_ or Lozenge figure so visible in this order, was also a
remarkable form of battle in the _Grecian_ Cavalry,[141] observed by the
_Thessalians_, and _Philip_ King of _Macedon_, and frequently by the
_Parthians_, As being most ready to turn every way, and best to be
commanded, as having its ductors, or Commanders at each Angle.

  [141] AElian. Tact.

The _Macedonian Phalanx_ (a long time thought invincible) consisted of a
long square. For though they might be sixteen in Rank and file, yet when
they shut close, so that the sixt pike advanced before the first, though
the number might be square, the figure was oblong, answerable unto the
Quincuncial quadrate of _Curtius_. According to this square _Thucydides_
delivers, the _Athenians_ disposed their battle against the
_Lacedemonians_ brickwise,[142] and by the same word the Learned
_Guellius_ expoundeth the quadrat of _Virgil_[143] after the form of a
brick or tile.

  [142] +en plasio.+

  [143] Secto via limite quadret. _Comment._ in Virgil.

And as the first station and position of trees, so was the first
habitation of men, not in round Cities, as of later foundation; For the
form of _Babylon_ the first City was square, and so shall also be the
last, according to the description of the holy City in the Apocalyps.
The famous pillars of _Seth_ before the floud had also the like
foundation, if they were but _antidiluvian_ Obelisks, and such as _Cham_
and his _AEgyptian_ race, imitated after the Floud.

But _Nineveh_ which Authours acknowledge to have exceeded _Babylon_, was
of a longilaterall[144] figure, ninety five Furlongs broad, and an
hundred and fifty long, and so making about sixty miles in circuit,
which is the measure of three dayes journey, according unto military
marches, or castrensiall mansions. So that if _Jonas_ entred at the
narrower side, he found enough for one dayes walk to attain the heart of
the City, to make his Proclamation, And if we imagine a City extending
from _Ware_ to _London_, the expression will be moderate of six score
thousand Infants, although we allow vacuities, fields, and intervals of
habitation, as there needs must be when the monument of _Ninus_ took up
no lesse then ten furlongs.

  [144] Diod. Sic.

And, though none of the seven wonders, yet a noble peece of Antiquity,
and made by a Copy exceeding all the rest, had its principal parts
disposed after this manner, that is, the Labyrinth of _Crete_, built
upon a long quadrate, containing five large squares, communicating by
right inflections, terminating in the centre of the middle square, and
lodging of the _Minotaur_, if we conform unto the description of the
elegant medal thereof in _Agostino_.[145] And though in many accounts we
reckon grosly by the square, yet is that very often to be accepted as a
long-sided quadrate which was the figure of the Ark of the Covenant, the
table of the Shew-bread, and the stone wherein the names of the twelve
Tribes were engraved, that is, three in a row, naturally making a
longilateral Figure, the perfect quadrate being made by nine.

  [145] Antonio Agostino delle medaglie.

What figure the stones themselves maintained, tradition and Scripture
are silent, yet Lapidaries in precious stones affect a Table or long
square, and in such proportion, that the two laterall, and also the
three inferiour Tables are equall unto the superiour, and the angles of
the laterall Tables, contain and constitute the _hypothenusae_, or broder
sides subtending.

That the Tables of the Law were of this figure, general imitation and
tradition hath confirmed; yet are we unwilling to load the shoulders of
_Moses_ with such massie stones, as some pictures lay upon them, since
'tis plainly delivered that he came down with them in his hand; since
the word strictly taken implies no such massie hewing, but cutting, and
fashioning of them into shape and surface; since some will have them
Emeralds, and if they were made of the materials of Mount _Sina_, not
improbable that they were marble: since the words were not many, the
letters short of seven hundred, and the Tables written on both sides
required no such capacity.

The beds of the Ancients were different from ours at present, which are
almost square, being framed oblong, and about a double unto their
breadth; not much unlike the _area_, or bed of this Quincuncial
quadrate. The single beds of _Greece_ were six foot,[146] and a
little more in length, three in breadth; the Giant-like bed of _Og_,
which had four cubits of bredth, nine and a half in length, varied not
much from this proportion. The Funeral bed of King _Cheops_, in the
greater Pyramid, which holds seven in length, and four foot in bredth,
had no great deformity from this measure; And whatsoever were the
bredth, the length could hardly be lesse, of the tyrannical bed of
_Procrustes_, since in a shorter measure he had not been fitted with
persons for his cruelty of extension. But the old sepulchral bed, or
_Amazonian_ Tomb[147] in the market-place of _Megara_, was in the form
of a Lozenge; readily made out by the composure of the body. For the
armes not lying fasciated or wrapt up after the _Grecian_ manner but in
a middle distention, the including lines will strictly make out that
figure.

  [146] Aristot. Mechan.

  [147] _Plut._ in vit. Thes.




CHAPTER III


Now although this elegant ordination of vegetables, hath found
coincidence or imitation in sundry works of Art, yet is it not also
destitute of natural examples, and though overlooked by all, was
elegantly observable, in severall works of nature.

Could we satisfie our selves in the position of the lights above, or
discover the wisedom of that order so invariably maintained in the fixed
Stars of heaven; Could we have any light, why the stellary part of the
first masse, separated into this order, that the Girdle of _Orion_
should ever maintain its line, and the two Stars in _Charles's_ Wain
never leave pointing at the Pole-Starre, we might abate the
_Pythagoricall_ Musick of the Spheres, the sevenfold Pipe of _Pan_; and
the strange Cryptography of _Gaffarell_ in his Starrie Book of Heaven.

But not to look so high as Heaven or the single Quincunx of the
_Hyades_ upon the neck of _Taurus_, the Triangle, and remarkable
_Crusero_ about the foot of the _Centaur_; observable rudiments there
are hereof in subterraneous concretions, and bodies in the Earth; in the
_Gypsum_ or _Talcum Rhomboides_, in the Favaginites or honey-comb-stone,
in the _Asteria_ and _Astroites_, and in the crucigerous stone of S.
_Iago_ of _Gallicia_.

The same is observably effected in the _Julus_, _Catkins_, or pendulous
excrescencies of severall Trees, of Wallnuts, Alders, and Hazels, which
hanging all the Winter, and maintaining their Net-work close, by the
expansion thereof are the early foretellers of the spring, discoverable
also in long Pepper, and elegantly in the _Julus_ of _Calamus
Aromaticus_, so plentifully growing with us in the first palms of
Willowes, and in the flowers of Sycamore, Petasites, Asphodelus, and
_Blattaria_, before explication. After such order stand the flowery
Branches in our best spread _Verbascum_, and the seeds about the spicous
head or torch of _Tapsus Barbatus_, in as fair a regularity as the
circular and wreathed order will admit, which advanceth one side of the
square, and makes the same Rhomboidall.

In the squamous heads of _Scabious_, _Knapweed_, and the elegant _Jacea
Pinea_, and in the Scaly composure of the Oak-Rose,[148] which some
years most aboundeth. After this order hath Nature planted the Leaves in
the Head of the common and prickled Artichoak: wherein the black and
shining Flies do shelter themselves, when they retire from the purple
Flower about it; The same is also found in the pricks, sockets, and
impressions of the seeds, in the pulp or bottome thereof; wherein do
elegantly stick the Fathers of their Mother. To omit the Quincunciall
Specks on the top of the Miscle-berry, especially that which grows upon
the _Tilia_ or Lime-Tree. And the remarkable disposure of those yellow
fringes about the purple Pestill of _Aaron_, and elegant clusters of
Dragons, so peculiarly secured by nature, with an _umbrella_ or
skreening Leaf about them.

  [148] Capitula squammata Quercum Bauhini, _whereof though he saith_
        perraro reperiuntur bis tantum invenimus, _yet we finde them
        commonly with us and in great numbers_.

[Sidenote: _Especially the_ porus cervinus Imperati, Sporosa, Alga
+platykeros+. Bauhini.]

The Spongy leaves of some Sea-wracks, Fucus, Oaks, in their several
kindes, found about the shoar,[149] with ejectments of the Sea, are
overwrought with Net-work elegantly containing this order, which plainly
declareth the naturality of this texture; And how the needle of nature
delighteth to work, even in low and doubtful vegetations.

  [149] Antho. Graec. inter Epigrammata +griphode endon emon metros
        lagonon echo patera+.

The _Arbustetum_ or Thicket on the head of the Teazell, may be observed
in this order: And he that considereth that fabrick so regularly
palisadoed, and stemm'd with flowers of the royal colour; in the house
of the solitary maggot, may finde the Seraglio of _Solomon_. And
contemplating the calicular shafts, and uncous disposure of their
extremities, so accommodable unto the office of abstersion, not condemn
as wholly improbable the conceit of those who accept it, for the herb
_Borith_.[150] Where by the way, we could with much inquiry never
discover any transfiguration, in this abstemious insect, although we
have kept them long in their proper houses, and boxes. Where some wrapt
up in their webbs, have lived upon their own bowels, from _September_
unto _July_.

  [150] _Jer._ 2, 22.

In such a grove doe walk the little creepers about the head of the
burre. And such an order is observed in the aculeous prickly plantation,
upon the heads of several common thistles, remarkably in the notable
palisados about the flower of the milk-thistle; And he that inquireth
into the little bottome of the globe-thistle, may finde that gallant
bush arise from a scalpe of like disposure.

The white umbrella or medicall bush of Elder, is an Epitome of this
order: arising from five main stemms Quincuncially disposed, and
tollerably maintained in their subdivisions. To omit the lower
observations in the seminal spike of Mercurie weld, and Plantane.

Thus hath nature ranged the flowers of Santfoyne, and French honey
suckle; and somewhat after this manner hath ordered the bush in
_Jupiters_ beard, or house-leek; which old superstition set on the tops
of houses, as a defensative against lightening and thunder. The like in
Fenny Seagreen or the water Souldier;[151] which, though a military name
from Greece, makes out the Roman order.

  [151] Stratiotes.

A like ordination there is in the favaginous Sockets, and Lozenge seeds
of the noble flower of the Sunne. Wherein in Lozenge figured boxes
nature shuts up the seeds, and balsame which is about them.

But the Firre and Pinetree from their fruits doe naturally dictate this
position. The Rhomboidall protuberances in Pineapples maintaining this
Quincuncial order unto each other, and each Rhombus in it self. Thus are
also disposed the triangular foliations, in the conicall fruit of the
firre tree, orderly shadowing and protecting the winged seeds below
them.

The like so often occurreth to the curiosity of observers, especially in
spicated seeds and flowers, that we shall not need to take in the single
Quincunx of Fuchsius in the grouth of the masle fearn, the seedie
disposure of Gramen Ischemon, and the trunck or neat Reticulate work in
the codde of the Sachell palme.

For even in very many round stalk plants, the leaves are set after a
Quintuple ordination, the first leaf answering the fift, in lateral
disposition. Wherein the leaves successively rounding the stalk, in
foure at the furthest the compass is absolved, and the fifth leafe or
sprout, returns to the position of the other fift before it; as in
accounting upward is often observable in furze pellitorye, Ragweed, the
sproutes of Oaks, and thorns upon pollards, and very remarkably in the
regular disposure of the rugged excrescencies in the yearly shoots of
the Pine.

But in square stalked plants, the leaves stand respectively unto each
other, either in crosse or decussation to those above or below them,
arising at crosse positions; whereby they shadow not each other, and
better resist the force of winds, which in a parallel situation, and
upon square stalkes would more forcibly bear upon them.

And to omit, how leaves and sprouts which compasse not the stalk, are
often set in a Rhomboides, and making long and short Diagonals, do stand
like the leggs of Quadrupeds when they goe: Nor to urge the thwart
enclosure and furdling of flowers, and blossomes, before explication, as
in the multiplied leaves of Pionie; And the Chiasmus in five leaved
flowers, while one lies wrapt about the staminous beards, the other
foure obliquely shutting and closing upon each other; and how even
flowers which consist of foure leaves, stand not ordinarily in three and
one, but two, and two crosse wise unto the Stilus; even the Autumnal
budds, which awaite the return of the Sun, doe after the winter solstice
multiply their calicular leaves, making little Rhombuses, and network
figures, as in the Sycamore and Lilac.

The like is discoverable in the original production of plants which
first putting forth two leaves, those which succeed, bear not over each
other, but shoot, obliquely or crossewise, untill the stalk appeareth;
which sendeth not forth its first leaves without all order unto them;
and he that from hence can discover in what position the two first
leaves did arise, is no ordinary observator.

Where by the way, he that observeth the rudimental spring of seeds,
shall finde strict rule, although not after this order. How little is
required unto effectual generation, and in what deminutives the plastick
principle lodgeth, is exemplified in seeds, wherein the greater mass
affords so little comproduction. In beans the leaf and root sprout from
the Germen, the main sides split, and lye by, and in some pull'd up near
the time of blooming, we have found the pulpous sides intire or little
wasted. In Acorns the nebb dilating splitteth the two sides, which
sometimes lye whole, when the Oak is sprouted two handfuls. In Lupins
these pulpy sides do sometimes arise with the stalk in a resemblance of
two fat leaves. Wheat and Rye will grow up, if after they have shot some
tender roots, the adhering pulp be taken from them. Beanes will prosper
though a part be cut away, and so much set as sufficeth to contain and
keep the Germen close. From this superfluous pulp in unkindely, and wet
years, may arise that multiplicity of little insects, which infest the
Roots and Sprouts of tender Graines and pulses.

In the little nebbe or fructifying principle, the motion is regular, and
not transvertible, as to make that ever the leaf, which nature intendeth
the root; observable from their conversion, until they attain their
right position, if seeds be set inversedly.

In vain we expect the production of plants from different parts of the
seed, from the same _corculum_ or little original proceed both
germinations; and in the power of this slender particle lye many Roots
and Spoutings, that though the same be pull'd away, the generative
particle will renew them again, and proceed to a perfect plant; And malt
may be observed to grow, though the Cummes be fallen from it.

The seminal nebbe hath a defined and single place, and not extended unto
both extremes. And therefore many too vulgarly conceive that Barley and
Oats grow at both ends; For they arise from one _punctilio_ or
generative nebbe, and the Speare sliding under the husk, first appeareth
nigh the toppe. But in Wheat and Rye being bare the sprouts are seen
together. If Barley unhulled would grow, both would appear at once. But
in this and Oat-meal the nebbe is broken away, which makes them the
milder food, and lesse apt to raise fermentation in Decoctions.

Men taking notice of what is outwardly visible, conceive a sensible
priority in the Root. But as they begin from one part, so they seem to
start and set out upon one signall of nature. In Beans yet soft, in
Pease while they adhere unto the Cod, the rudimentall Leafe and Root are
discoverable. In the Seeds of Rocket and Mustard, sprouting in Glasses
of water, when the one is manifest the other is also perceptible. In
muddy waters apt to breed _Duckweed_, and Periwinkles, if the first and
rudimentall stroaks of _Duckweed_ be observed, the Leaves and Root
anticipate not each other. But in the Date-stone the first sprout is
neither root nor leaf distinctly, but both together; For the Germination
being to passe through the narrow navel and hole about the midst of the
stone, the generative germ is faine to enlengthen it self, and shooting
out about an inch, at that distance divideth into the ascending and
descending portion.

And though it be generally thought that Seeds will root at that end,
where they adhere to their Originals, and observable it is that the
nebbe sets most often next the stalk, as in Grains, Pulses, and most
small Seeds, yet is it hardly made out in many greater plants. For in
Acornes, Almonds, Pistachios, Wallnuts, and acuminated shells, the germ
puts forth at the remotest part of the pulp. And therefore to set Seeds
in that posture, wherein the Leaf and Roots may shoot right without
contortion, or forced circumvolution, which might render them strongly
rooted, and straighter, were a Criticisme in Agriculture. And nature
seems to have made some provision hereof in many from their figure, that
as they fall from the Tree they may lye in Positions agreeable to such
advantages.

Beside the open and visible Testicles of plants, the seminall powers lie
in great part invisible, while the Sun findes polypody in stone-wals,
the little stinging Nettle, and nightshade in barren sandy High-wayes,
_Scurvy-grasse_ in _Greeneland_, and unknown plants in earth brought
from remote Countries. Beside the known longevity of some Trees, what is
the most lasting herb, or seed, seems not easily determinable. Mandrakes
upon known account have lived near an hundred yeares. Seeds found in
Wilde-Fowls Gizards have sprouted in the earth. The Seeds of Marjorane
and _Stramonium_ carelessly kept, have grown after seven years. Even in
Garden-Plots long fallow, and digged up, the seeds of _Blattaria_ and
yellow henbane, and after twelve years burial have produced themselves
again.

That bodies are first spirits _Paracelsus_ could affirm, which in the
maturation of Seeds and fruits, seems obscurely implied by[152]
_Aristotle_, when he delivereth, that the spirituous parts are
converted into water, and the water into earth, and attested by
observation in the maturative progresse of Seeds, wherein at first may
be discerned a flatuous distention of the husk, afterwards a thin
liquor, which longer time digesteth into a pulp or kernell observable in
Almonds and large Nuts. And some way answered in the progressionall
perfection of animall semination, in its spermaticall maturation, from
crude pubescency unto perfection. And even that seeds themselves in
their rudimentall discoveries, appear in foliaceous surcles, or sprouts
within their coverings, in a diaphanous gellie, before deeper
incrassation, is also visibly verified in Cherries, Acorns, Plums.

  [152] In met. cum Gabeo.

From seminall considerations, either in reference unto one mother, or
distinction from animall production, the holy Scripture describeth the
vegetable creation; And while it divideth plants but into Herb and Tree,
though it seemeth to make but an accidental division, from magnitude, it
tacitely containeth the naturall distinction of vegetables, observed by
Herbarists, and comprehending the four kinds. For since the most
naturall distinction is made from the production of leaf or stalk, and
plants after the two first seminall leaves, do either proceed to send
forth more leaves, or a stalk, and the folious and stalky emission
distinguisheth herbs and trees, in a large acception it compriseth all
Vegetables, for the frutex and suffrutex are under the progression of
trees, and stand Authentically differenced, but from the accidents of
the stalk.

The AEquivocal production of things under undiscerned principles, makes a
large part of generation, though they seem to hold a wide univocacy in
their set and certain Originals, while almost every plant breeds its
peculiar insect, most a Butterfly, moth or fly, wherein the Oak seemes
to contain the largest seminality, while the Julus, Oak, apple, dill,
woolly tuft, foraminous roundles upon the leaf, and grapes under ground
make a Fly with some difference. The great variety of Flyes lyes in the
variety of their Originals, in the Seeds of Caterpillars or Cankers
there lyeth not only a Butterfly or Moth, but if they be sterill or
untimely cast, their production is often a Fly, which we have also
observed from corrupted and mouldred Egges, both of Hens and Fishes; To
omit the generation of Bees out of the bodies of dead Heifers, or what
is strange yet well attested, the production of Eeles[153] in the backs
of living Cods and Perches.

  [153] Schoneveldus de Pisc.

The exiguity and smallnesse of some seeds extending to large productions
is one of the magnalities of nature, somewhat illustrating the work of
the Creation, and vast production from nothing. The true seeds of
Cypresse[154] and Rampions are indistinguishable by old eyes. Of the
seeds of Tobacco a thousand make not one grain, The disputed seeds of
Harts tongue, and Maidenhair, require a greater number. From such
undiscernable seminalities arise spontaneous productions. He that would
discern the rudimentall stroak of a plant, may behold it in the
Originall of Duckweed, at the bignesse of a pins point, from convenient
water in glasses, wherein a watchfull eye may also discover the
puncticular Originals of Periwincles and Gnats.

  [154] Doctissim. Laurenburg horr.

That seeds of some Plants are lesse then any animals, seems of no clear
decision; That the biggest of Vegetables exceedeth the biggest of
Animals, in full bulk, and all dimensions, admits exception in the
Whale, which in length and above ground measure, will also contend with
tall Oakes. That the richest odour of plants surpasseth that of Animals,
may seem of some doubt, since animall-musk, seems to excell the
vegetable, and we finde so noble a scent in the Tulip-Fly, and
Goat-Beetle.[155]

  [155] _The long and tender green_ Capricornus _rarely found, we could
        never meet with but two._

Now whether seminall nebbes hold any sure proportion unto seminall
enclosures, why the form of the germe doth not answer the figure of the
enclosing pulp, why the nebbe is seated upon the solid, and not the
channeld side of the seed as in grains, why since we often meet with two
yolks in one shell, and sometimes one Egge within another, we do not
oftener meet with two nebbes in one distinct seed: why since the Egges
of a Hen laid at one course, do commonly outweigh the bird, and some
moths coming out of their cases, without assistance of food, will lay so
many Egges as to outweigh their bodies, trees rarely bear their fruit,
in that gravity or proportion: Whether in the germination of seeds
according to _Hippocrates_, the lighter part ascendeth, and maketh the
sprout, the heaviest tending downward frameth the root; Since we observe
that the first shoot of seeds in water, will sink or bow down at the
upper and leafing end: Whether it be not more rational Epicurisme to
contrive whole dishes out of the nebbes and spirited particles of
plants, then from the Gallatures and treddles of Egges; since that part
is found to hold no seminall share in Oval Generation, are quaeries which
might enlarge but must conclude this digression.

And though not in this order, yet how nature delighteth in this number,
and what consent and coordination there is in the leaves and parts of
flowers, it cannot escape our observation in no small number of plants.
For the calicular or supporting and closing leaves, do answer the number
of the flowers, especially in such as exceed not the number of Swallows
Egges; as in Violets, Stichwort, Blossomes, and flowers of one leaf
have often five divisions, answered by a like number of calicular
leaves; as _Gentianella, Convolvulus_, Bell-flowers. In many the
flowers, blades, or staminous shoots and leaves are all equally five, as
in cockle, mullein and _Blattaria_; Wherein the flowers before
explication are pentagonally wrapped up, with some resemblance of the
_blatta_ or moth from whence it hath its name; But the contrivance of
nature is singular in the opening and shutting of Bindeweeds, performed
by five inflexures, distinguishable by pyramidicall figures, and also
different colours.

The rose at first is thought to have been of five leaves, as it yet
groweth wilde among us; but in the most luxuriant, the calicular leaves
do still maintain that number. But nothing is more admired then the five
Brethren of the Rose, and the strange disposure of the Appendices or
Beards, in the calicular leaves thereof, which in despair of resolution
is tolerably salved from this contrivance, best ordered and suited for
the free closure of them before explication. For those two which are
smooth, and of no beard are contrived to lye undermost, as without
prominent parts, and fit to be smoothly covered, the other two which are
beset with Beards on either side, stand outward and uncovered, but the
fifth or half-bearded leaf is covered on the bare side but on the open
side stands free, and bearded like the other.

Besides a large number of leaves have five divisions, and may be
circumscribed by a _Pentagon_ or figure of five Angles, made by right
lines from the extremity of their leaves, as in Maple, Vine, Figge-Tree:
But five-leaved flowers are commonly disposed circularly about the
_Stylus_; according to the higher Geometry of Nature, dividing a circle
by five _Radii_, which concurre not to make Diameters, as in
Quadrilaterall and sexangular Intersections.

Now the number of five is remarkable in every Circle, not only as the
first sphaerical Number, but the measure of sphaerical motion. For
sphaerical bodies move by fives, and every globular Figure placed upon a
plane, in direct volutation, returns to the first point of contaction in
the fift touch, accounting by the Axes of the Diameters or Cardinall
points of the four quarters thereof. And before it arriveth unto the
same point again, it maketh five circles equall unto it self, in each
progresse from those quarters, absolving an equall circle.

By the same number doth nature divide the circle of the Sea-starre, and
in that order and number disposeth those elegant Semi-circles, or
dentall sockets and egges in the Sea Hedge-hogge. And no mean
Observations hereof there is in the Mathematicks of the neatest Retiary
Spider, which concluding in fourty four Circles, from five Semidiameters
beginneth that elegant texture.

And after this manner doth lay the foundation of the Circular branches
of the Oak, which being five-cornered, in the tender annual sprouts, and
manifesting upon incision the signature of a Starre, is after made
circular, and swel'd into a round body: Which practice of nature is
become a point of art, and makes two Problemes in _Euclide_.[156] But
the Bryar which sends forth shoots and prickles from its angles,
maintains its pentagonall figure, and the unobserved signature of a
handsome porch within it. To omit the five small buttons dividing the
Circle of the Ivy-berry, and the five characters in the Winter stalk of
the Walnut, with many other Observables, which cannot escape the eyes of
signal discerners; Such as know where to finde _Ajax_ his name in
_Gallitricum_, or _Arons_ Mitre in Henbane.

  [156] Elem. _li._ 4.

Quincuncial forms and ordinations are also observable in animal
figurations. For to omit the hioides or throat bone of animals, the
_furcula_ or _merry-thought_ in birds; which supporteth the _scapulae_,
affording a passage for the winde-pipe and the gullet, the wings of
Flyes, and disposure of their legges in their first formation from
maggots, and the position of their horns, wings and legges, in their
_Aurelian_ cases and swadling clouts: The back of the _Cimex Arboreus_,
found often upon Trees and lesser plants, doth elegantly discover the
_Burgundian_ decussation; And the like is observable in the belly of the
_Notonecton_, or water-Beetle, which swimmeth on its back, and the
handsome Rhombusses of the Sea-poult, or Weazell, on either side the
Spine.

The sexangular Cels in the Honey-combs of Bees are disposed after this
order, much there is not of wonder in the confused Houses of Pismires;
though much in their busie life and actions, more in the edificial
Palaces of Bees and Monarchical spirits; who make their combs
six-corner'd, declining a circle, whereof many stand not close together,
and compleatly fill the _area_ of the place; But rather affecting a
six-sided figure, whereby every cell affords a common side unto six
more, and also a fit receptacle for the Bee it self, which gathering
into a Cylindrical Figure, aptly enters its sexangular house, more
nearly approaching a circular figure, then either doth the Square or
Triangle. And the Combes themselves so regularly contrived, that their
mutual intersections make three Lozenges at the bottom of every Cell;
which severally regarded make three Rows of neat Rhomboidall Figures,
connected at the angles, and so continue three several chaines
throughout the whole comb.

As for the _Favago_ found commonly on the Sea-shoar, though named from
an honey-comb, it but rudely makes out the resemblance, and better
agrees with the round Cels of humble Bees. He that would exactly discern
the shop of a Bees mouth, need observing eyes, and good augmenting
glasses; wherein is discoverable one of the neatest peeces in nature,
and must have a more piercing eye then mine; who findes out the shape of
Buls heads, in the guts of Drones pressed out behinde, according to the
experiment of _Gomesius_[157]; wherein notwithstanding there seemeth
somewhat which might incline a pliant fancy to credulity of similitude.

  [157] Gom. de Sale.

A resemblance hereof there is in the orderly and rarely disposed Cels,
made by Flyes and Insects, which we have often found fastened about
small sprigs, and in those cottonary and woolly pillows, which sometimes
we meet with fastened unto Leaves, there is included an elegant Net-work
Texture, out of which come many small Flies. And some resemblance there
is of this order in the Egges of some Butterflies and moths, as they
stick upon leaves, and other substances; which being dropped from
behinde, nor directed by the eye, doth neatly declare how nature
Geometrizeth, and observeth order in all things.

A like correspondency in figure is found in the skins and outward
teguments of animals, whereof a regardable part are beautiful by this
texture. As the backs of several Snakes and Serpents, elegantly
remarkable in the _Aspis_, and the Dart-snake, in the Chiasmus, and
larger decussations upon the back of the Rattlesnake, and in the close
and finer texture of the _Mater formicarum_, or snake that delights in
Anthils; whereby upon approach of outward injuries, they can raise a
thicker Phalanx on their backs, and handsomely contrive themselves into
all kindes of flexures: Whereas their bellies are commonly covered with
smooth semicircular divisions, as best accommodable unto their quick and
gliding motion.

This way is followed by nature in the peculiar and remarkable tayl of
the Bever, wherein the scaly particles are disposed, somewhat after this
order, which is the plainest resolution of the wonder of _Bellonius_,
while he saith, with incredible Artifice hath Nature framed the tayl or
Oar of the Bever: where by the way we cannot but wish a model of their
houses, so much extolled by some Describers: wherein since they are so
bold as to venture upon three stages, we might examine their Artifice in
the contignations, the rule and order in the compartitions; or whether
that magnified structure be any more then a rude rectangular pyle or
meer hovell-building.

Thus works the hand of nature in the feathery plantation about birds.
Observable in the skins of the breast,[158] legs and Pinions of Turkies,
Geese, and Ducks, and the Oars or finny feet of Water-Fowl: And such a
naturall net is the scaly covering of Fishes, of Mullets, Carps,
Tenches, _etc._ even in such as are excoriable and consist of smaller
scales, as Bretts, Soals, and Flounders. The like Reticulate grain is
observable in some _Russia_ Leather. To omit the ruder Figures of the
ostracion, the triangular or cunny fish, or the pricks of the
Sea-Porcupine.

  [158] _Elegantly conspicuous on the inside of the striped skins of
        Dive-Fowl, of the cormorant, Goshonder, Weasell, Loon_, etc.

The same is also observable in some part of the skin of man, in habits
of neat texture, and therefore not unaptly compared unto a Net: We
shall not affirm that from such grounds, the AEgyptian Embalmers imitated
this texture, yet in their linnen folds the same is still observable
among their neatest Mummies, in the figures of _Isis_ and _Osyris_, and
the Tutelary spirits in the Bembine Table. Nor is it to be over-looked
how _Orus_, the Hieroglyphick of the world is described in a Net-work
covering, from the shoulder to the foot. And (not to enlarge upon the
cruciated Character of _Trismegistus_, or handed crosses, so often
occurring in the Needles of _Pharaoh_, and Obelisks of Antiquity) the
_Statuae Isiacae_, Teraphims, and little Idols, found about the Mummies,
do make a decussation or _Jacobs_ Crosse, with their armes, like that on
the head of _Ephraim_ and _Manasses_, and this _decussis_ is also
graphically described between them.

This Reticulate or Net-work was also considerable in the inward parts of
man, not only from the first _subtegmen_ or warp of his formation, but
in the netty _fibres_ of the veines and vessels of life; wherein
according to common Anatomy the right and transverse _fibres_ are
decussated by the oblique _fibres_; and so must frame a Reticulate and
Quincuncial Figure by their Obliquations, Emphatically extending that
Elegant expression of Scripture. Thou hast curiously embroydered me,
thou hast wrought me up after the finest way of texture, and as it were
with a Needle.

Nor is the same observable only in some parts, but in the whole body of
man, which upon the extension of arms and legges, doth make out a
square, whose intersection is at the genitals. To omit the phantastical
Quincunx, in _Plato_ of the first Hermaphrodite or double man, united at
the Loynes, which _Jupiter_ after divided.

A rudimental resemblance hereof there is in the cruciated and rugged
folds of the _Reticulum_, or Net-like Ventricle of ruminating horned
animals, which is the second in order, culinarily called the Honey-comb.
For many divisions there are in the stomack of severall animals; what
number they maintain in the _Scarus_ and ruminating Fish, common
description, or our own experiment hath made no discovery. But in the
Ventricle of _Porpuses_ there are three divisions. In many Birds a crop,
Gizard, and little receptacle before it; but in Cornigerous animals,
which chew the cudd, there are no lesse then four of distinct position
and office.

The _Reticulum_ by these crossed cels, makes a further digestion, in the
dry and exuccous part of the Aliment received from the first Ventricle.
For at the bottome of the gullet there is a double Orifice; What is
first received at the mouth descendeth into the first and greater
stomack, from whence it is returned into the mouth again; and after a
fuller mastication, and salivous mixture, what part thereof descendeth
again, in a moist and succulent body, it slides down the softer and more
permeable Orifice, into the Omasus or third stomack; and from thence
conveyed into the fourth, receives its last digestion. The other dry and
exuccous part after rumination by the larger and stronger Orifice
beareth into the first stomack, from thence into the _Reticulum_, and so
progressively into the other divisions. And therefore in Calves newly
calved, there is little or no use of the two first Ventricles, for the
milk and liquid aliment slippeth down the softer Orifice, into the third
stomack; where making little or no stay, it passeth into the fourth, the
seat of the _Coagulum_, or Runnet, or that division of stomack which
seems to bear the name of the whole, in the Greek translation of the
Priests Fee, in the Sacrifice of Peace-offerings.

As for those Rhomboidal Figures made by the Cartilagineous parts of the
Wezon, in the Lungs of great Fishes, and other animals, as _Rondeletius_
discovered, we have not found them so to answer our Figure as to be
drawn into illustration; Something we expected in the more discernable
texture of the lungs of frogs, which notwithstanding being but two
curious bladders not weighing above a grain, we found interwoven with
veins, not observing any just order. More orderly situated are those
cretaceous and chalky concretions found sometimes in the bignesse of a
small fech on either side their spine; which being not agreeable unto
our order, nor yet observed by any, we shall not here discourse on.

But had we found a better account and tolerable Anatomy of that
prominent jowle of the _Sperma Ceti_ Whale,[159] then questuary
operation, or the stench of the last cast upon our shoar, permitted, we
might have perhaps discovered some handsome order in those Net-like
seases and sockets, made like honey-combs, containing that medicall
matter.

  [159] 1652. _described in our_ Pseudo Epidem. _Edit._ 3.

Lastly, The incession or locall motion of animals is made with analogy
unto this figure, by decussative diametrals, Quincunciall Lines and
angles. For to omit the enquiry how Butterflies and breezes move their
four wings, how birds and fishes in ayre and water move by joynt stroaks
of opposite wings and Finnes, and how salient animals in jumping forward
seem to arise and fall upon a square base; As the station of most
Quadrupeds is made upon a long square, so in their motion they make a
Rhomboides; their common progression being performed Diametrally, by
decussation and crosse advancement of their legges, which not observed
begot that remarkable absurdity in the position of the legges of
_Castors_ horse in the Capitoll. The Snake which moveth circularly makes
his spires in like order, the convex and concave spirals answering each
other at alternate distances; In the motion of man the armes and legges
observe this thwarting position, but the legges alone do move
Quincuncially by single angles with some resemblance of an V measured by
successive advancement from each foot, and the angle of indenture great
or lesse, according to the extent or brevity of the stride.

Studious Observators may discover more analogies in the orderly book of
nature, and cannot escape the Elegancy of her hand in other
correspondencies. The Figures of nails and crucifying appurtenances, are
but precariously made out in the _Granadilla_ or flower of Christs
passion; And we despair to behold in these parts that handsome draught
of crucifixion in the fruit of the _Barbado_ Pine. The seminal Spike of
_Phalaris_, or great shaking grasse, more nearly answers the tayl of a
Rattle-Snake, then many resemblances in Porta: And if the man
_Orchis_[160] of _Culumna_ be well made out, it excelleth all analogies.
In young Wall-nuts cut athwart, it is not hard to apprehend strange
characters; and in those of somewhat elder growth, handsome ornamental
draughts about a plain crosse. In the root of _Osmond_ or Water-fern,
every eye may discern the form of a Half Moon, Rain-bow, or half the
character of _Pisces_. Some finde Hebrew, Arabick, Greek, and Latine
Characters in Plants; In a common one among us we seem to reade _Acaia_,
_Viviu_, _Lilil_.

  [160] Orchis Anthropophora, Fabii Columnae.

Right lines and circles make out the bulk of plants; In the parts
thereof we finde Helicall or spirall roundles, voluta's, conicall
Sections, circular Pyramids, and frustums of _Archimedes_; And cannot
overlook the orderly hand of nature, in the alternate succession of the
flat and narrower sides in the tender shoots of the Ashe, or the regular
inequality of bignesse in the five leaved flowers of Henbane, and
something like in the calicular leaves of _Tutson_. How the spots of
_Persicaria_ do manifest themselves between the sixth and tenth ribbe.
How the triangular capp in the stemme or _stylus_ of Tuleps doth
constantly point at three outward leaves. That spicated flowers do open
first at the stalk. That white flowers have yellow thrums or knops. That
the nebbe of Beans and Pease do all look downward, and so presse not
upon each other; And how the seeds of many pappous or downy flowers
lockt up in sockets after a gomphosis or _mortis_-articulation, diffuse
themselves circularly into branches of rare order, observable in
_Tragopogan_ or Goats-beard, conformable to the Spiders web, and the
_Radii_ in like manner telarely inter-woven.

And how in animall natures, even colours hold correspondencies, and
mutuall correlations. That the colour of the Caterpillar will shew again
in the Butterfly, with some latitude is allowable. Though the regular
spots in their wings seem but a mealie adhesion, and such as may be
wiped away, yet since they come in this variety, out of their cases,
there must be regular pores in those parts and membranes, defining such
Exudations.

That _Augustus_[161] had native notes on his body and belly, after the
order and number in the Starre of _Charles wayne_, will not seem strange
unto astral Physiognomy, which accordingly considereth moles in the body
of man, or Physicall Observators, who from the position of moles in the
face, reduce them to rule and correspondency in other parts. Whether
after the like method medicall conjecture may not be raised, upon parts
inwardly affected; since parts about the lips are the criticall seats of
Pustules discharged in Agues; And scrophulous tumours about the neck do
so often speak the like about the Mesentery, may also be considered.

  [161] Suet. in vit. Aug.

The russet neck in young Lambs seems but adventitious, and may owe its
tincture to some contaction in the womb; But that if sheep have any
black or deep russet in their faces, they want not the same about their
legges and feet; That black Hounds have mealy months and feet; That
black Cows which have any white in their tayls, should not misse of some
in their bellies; and if all white in their bodies, yet if
black-mouth'd, their ears and feet maintain the same colour, are
correspondent tinctures not ordinarily failing in nature, which easily
unites the accidents of extremities, since in some generations she
transmutes the parts themselves, while in the _Aurelian Metamorphosis_
the head of the canker becomes the Tayl of the Butterfly. Which is in
some way not beyond the contrivance of Art, in submersions and Inlays,
inverting the extremes of the plant, and fetching the root from the top,
and also imitated in handsome columnary work, in the inversion of the
extremes; wherein the Capitel, and the Base, hold such near
correspondency.

In the motive parts of animals may be discovered mutuall proportions;
not only in those of Quadrupeds, but in the thigh-bone, legge,
foot-bone, and claws of Birds. The legs of Spiders are made after a
sesquitertian proportion, and the long legs of some locusts, double unto
some others. But the internodial parts of Vegetables, or spaces between
the joints, are contrived with more uncertainty; though the joints
themselves in many Plants, maintain a regular number.

In vegetable composure, the unition of prominent parts seems most to
answer the _Apophyses_ or processes of Animall bones, whereof they are
the produced parts or prominent explantations. And though in the parts
of plants which are not ordained for motion, we do not expect
correspondent Articulations; yet in the setting on of some flowers, and
seeds in their sockets, and the lineall commissure of the pulp of
severall seeds, may be observed some shadow of the Harmony; some show of
the _Gomphosis_ or _mortis_-articulation.

As for the _Diarthrosis_ or motive Articulation, there is expected
little Analogy, though long-stalked leaves doe move by long lines, and
have observable motions, yet are they made by outward impulsion, like
the motion of pendulous bodies, while the parts themselves are united by
some kinde of _symphysis_ unto the stock.

But standing Vegetables, void of motive-Articulations, are not without
many motions. For beside the motion of vegetation upward, and of
radiation unto all quarters, that of contraction, dilatation,
inclination, and contortion, is discoverable in many plants. To omit the
rose of _Jericho_, the ear of Rye, which moves with change of weather,
and the Magical spit, made of no rare plants, which windes before the
fire, and rosts the bird without turning.

Even Animals near the Classis of plants, seem to have the most restlesse
motions. The Summer-worm of Ponds and plashes makes a long waving
motion; the hair-worm seldome lies still. He that would behold a very
anomalous motion, may observe it in the Tortile and tiring stroaks of
Gnatworms.[162]

  [162] _Found often in some form of redmaggot in the standing waters of
        Cisterns in the Summer._




CHAPTER IV


As for the delights, commodities, mysteries, with other concernments of
this order, we are unwilling to fly them over, in the short deliveries
of _Virgil_, _Varro_, or others, and shall therefore enlarge with
additionall ampliations.

By this position they had a just proportion of Earth, to supply an
equality of nourishment. The distance being ordered, thick or thin,
according to the magnitude or vigorous attraction of the plant, the
goodnesse, leannesse, or propriety of the soyl, and therefore the rule
of _Solon_, concerning the territory of _Athens_, not extendible unto
all; allowing the distance of six foot unto common Trees, and nine for
the Figge and Olive.

They had a due diffusion of their roots on all or both sides, whereby
they maintained some proportion to their height, in Trees of large
radication. For that they strictly make good their profundeur or depth
unto their height, according to common conceit, and that expression of
_Virgil_,[163] though confirmable from the plane Tree in _Pliny_, and
some few examples, is not to be expected from the generation of Trees
almost in any kinde, either of side-spreading or tap-roots: Except we
measure them by lateral and opposite diffusions; nor commonly to be
found in _minor_ or hearby plants; If we except Sea-holly, Liquorish,
Sea-rush, and some others.

  [163] Quantum vertice ad auras AEthereas, tantum radice ad tartara
        tendit.

They had a commodious radiation in their growth; and a due expansion of
their branches, for shadow or delight. For trees thickly planted, do
runne up in height and branch with no expansion, shooting unequally or
short, and thinne upon the neighbouring side. And therefore Trees are
inwardly bare, and spring, and leaf from the outward and Sunny side of
their branches.

Whereby they also avoided the perill of +synolethrismos+ or one tree
perishing with another, as it happeneth ofttimes from the sick
_effluviums_ or entanglements of the roots, falling foul with each
other. Observable in Elmes set in hedges, where if one dieth the
neighbouring Tree prospereth not long after.

In this situation divided into many intervals and open unto six
passages, they had the advantage of a fair perflation from windes,
brushing and cleansing their surfaces; relaxing and closing their pores
unto due perspiration. For that they afford large _effluviums_
perceptible from odours, diffused at great distances, is observable from
Onyons out of the Earth; which though dry, and kept until the spring, as
they shoot forth large and many leaves, do notably abate of their
weight. And mint growing in glasses of water, until it arriveth unto the
weight of an ounce, in a shady place, will sometimes exhaust a pound of
water.

And as they send forth much, so may they receive somewhat in: For beside
the common way and road of reception by the root, there may be a
refection and imbibition from without; For gentle showrs refresh plants,
though they enter not their roots; And the good and bad _effluviums_ of
Vegetables, promote or debilitate each other. So _Epithymum_ and
_Dodder_, rootlesse and out of the ground, maintain themselves upon
Thyme, Savory, and plants, whereon they hang. And _Ivy_ divided from the
root, we have observed to live some years, by the cirrous parts commonly
conceived but as tenacles and holdfasts unto it. The stalks of mint
cropt from the root stripped from the leaves, and set in _glasses_ with
the root end upward, and out of the water, we have observed to send
forth sprouts and leaves without the aid of roots, and _scordium_ to
grow in like manner, the leaves set downward in water. To omit severall
Sea-plants, which grow on single roots from stones, although in very
many there are side-shoots _fibres_, beside the fastening root.

By this open position they were fairly exposed unto the rayes of Moon
and Sunne, so considerable in the growth of Vegetables. For though
Poplars, Willows, and severall Trees be made to grow about the brinks of
_Acharon_, and dark habitations of the dead; Though some plants are
content to grow in obscure Wells; wherein also old Elme pumps afford
sometimes long bushy sprouts, not observable in any above ground: And
large fields of Vegetables are able to maintain their verdure at the
bottome and shady part of the Sea; yet the greatest number are not
content without the actual rayes of the Sun, but bend, incline, and
follow them; As large lists of solisequious and Sun-following plants.
And some observe the method of its motion in their own growth and
conversion twining towards the West by the South, as Bryony, Hops,
Woodbine, and several kindes of Bindeweed, which we shall more admire;
when any can tell us, they observe another motion, and Twist by the
North at the _Antipodes_. The same plants rooted against an erect
North-wall full of holes, will finde a way through them to look upon the
Sun. And in tender plants from mustard-seed, sown in the winter, and in
a plot of earth placed inwardly against a South-window, the tender
stalks of two leaves arose not erect, but bending towards the window,
nor looking much higher then the Meridian Sun. And if the pot were
turned they would work themselves into their former declinations, making
their conversion by the East. That the Leaves of the Olive and some
other Trees solstitially turn, and precisely tell us, when the Sun is
entred _Cancer_, is scarce expectable in any Climate; and _Theophrastus_
warily observes it; Yet somewhat thereof is observable in our own, in
the leaves of Willows and Sallows, some weeks after the Solstice. But
the great _Convolvulus_ or white-flower'd _Bindweed_ observes both
motions of the Sunne, while the flower twists AEquinoctionally from the
left hand to the right according to the daily revolution; The stalk
twineth ecliptically from the right to the left, according to the annual
conversion.

Some commend the exposure of these orders unto the Western gales, as the
most generative and fructifying breath of heaven. But we applaud the
Husbandry of _Solomon_, whereto agreeth the doctrine of _Theophrastus_.
Arise O North-winde, and blow thou South upon my garden, that the spices
thereof may flow out; For the North-winde closing the pores, and
shutting up the _effluviums_, when the South doth after open and relax
them; the Aromatical gummes do drop, and sweet odours fly actively from
them. And if his garden had the same situation, which mapps and charts
afford it, on the East side of _Jerusalem_, and having the wall on the
West; these were the winds, unto which it was well exposed.

By this way of plantation they encreased the number of their trees,
which they lost in _Quaternio's_, and square-orders, which is a
commodity insisted on by _Varro_, and one great intent of nature, in
this position of flowers and seeds in the elegant formation of plants,
and the former Rules observed in naturall and artificiall Figurations.

Whether in this order and one Tree in some measure breaking the cold,
and pinching gusts of windes from the other, trees will not better
maintain their inward circles, and either escape or moderate their
excentricities, may also be considered. For the circles in Trees are
naturally concentricall, parallel unto the bark, and unto each other,
till frost and piercing windes contract and close them on the
weatherside, the opposite semi-circle widely enlarging, and at a comely
distance, which hindreth oftentimes the beauty and roundnesse of Trees,
and makes the Timber lesse serviceable; whiles the ascending juyce not
readily passing, settles in knots and inequalities. And therefore it is
no new course of Agriculture, to observe the native position of Trees
according to North and South in their transplantations.

The same is also observable underground in the circinations and
sphaerical rounds of Onyons, wherein the circles of the Orbes are
ofttimes larger, and the meridionall lines stand wider upon one side
then the other. And where the largenesse will make up the number of
planetical Orbes, that of _Luna_, and the lower planets excede the
dimensions of _Saturne_, and the higher: Whether the like be not
verified in the Circles of the large roots of Briony and Mandrake, or
why in the knotts of Deale or Firre the Circles are often eccentrical,
although not in a plane, but vertical and right position, deserves a
further enquiry.

Whether there be not some irregularity of roundnesse in most plants
according to their position? Whether some small compression of pores be
not perceptible in parts which stand against the current of waters, as
in Reeds, Bull-rushes, and other vegetables toward the streaming
quarter, may also be observed, and therefore such as are long and weak,
are commonly contrived into a roundnesse of figure, whereby the water
presseth lesse, and slippeth more smoothly from them, and even in flags
or flat-figured leaves, the greater part obvert their sharper sides unto
the current in ditches.

But whether plants which float upon the surface of the water, be for the
most part of cooling qualities, those which shoot above it of heating
vertues, and why? whether _Sargasso_ for many miles floating upon the
Western Ocean, or Sea-lettuce, and Phasganium at the bottome of our
Seas, make good the like qualities? Why Fenny waters afford the hottest
and sweetest plants, as Calamus, Cyperus, and Crowfoot, and mudd cast
out of ditches most naturally produceth Arsmart? Why plants so greedy of
water so little regard oyl? Why since many seeds contain much oyl within
them, they endure it not well without, either in their growth or
production? Why since Seeds shoot commonly under ground, and out of the
aire, those which are let fall in shallow glasses, upon the surface of
the water, will sooner sprout then those at the bottom? And if the water
be covered with oyle, those at the bottome will hardly sprout at all, we
have not room to conjecture.

Whether Ivy would not lesse offend the Trees in this clean ordination,
and well kept paths, might perhaps deserve the question. But this were a
quaery only unto some habitations, and little concerning _Cyrus_ or the
Babylonian territory; wherein by no industry _Harpalus_ could make Ivy
grow: And _Alexander_ hardly found it about those parts to imitate the
pomp of _Bacchus_. And though in these Northern Regions we are too much
acquainted with one Ivy, we know too little of another, whereby we
apprehend not the expressions of Antiquity, the Splenetick[164] medicine
of _Galen_, and the Emphasis of the Poet, in the beauty of the white
Ivy.[165]

  [164] Galen. de med. secundum loc.

  [165] Hedera formosior alba.

The like concerning the growth of Misseltoe, which dependeth not only
of the _species_, or kinde of Tree, but much also of the Soil. And
therefore common in some places, not readily found in others, frequent
in _France_, not so common in _Spain_, and scarce at all in the
Territory of _Ferrara_: Nor easily to be found where it is most required
upon Oakes, lesse on trees continually verdant. Although in some places
the Olive escapeth it not, requiting its detriment, in the delightful
view of its red Berries; as _Clusius_ observed in _Spain_, and
_Bellonius_ about _Hierusalem_. But this Parasitical plant suffers
nothing to grow upon it, by any way of art; nor could we ever make it
grow where nature had not planted it; as we have in vain attempted by
inocculation and incision, upon its native or forreign stock, and though
there seem nothing improbable in the seed, it hath not succeeded by
sation in any manner of ground, wherein we had no reason to despair
since we reade of vegetable horns [SN: Linschoten.], and how Rams horns
will root about _Goa_.

But besides these rural commodities, it cannot be meanly delectable in
the variety of Figures, which these orders open, and closed do make.
Whilest every inclosure makes a _Rhombus_, the figures obliquely taken a
Rhomboides, the intervals bounded with parallel lines, and each
intersection built upon a square, affording two Triangles or Pyramids
vertically conjoyned; which in the strict Quincuncial order do
oppositely make acute and blunt Angles.

And though therein we meet not with right angles, yet every Rhombus
containing four Angles equal unto two right, it virtually contains two
right in every one. Nor is this strange unto such as observe the natural
lines of Trees, and parts disposed in them. For neither in the root doth
nature affect this angle, which shooting downward for the stability of
the plant, doth best effect the same by Figures of Inclination; Nor in
the Branches and stalky leaves, which grow most at acute angles; as
declining from their head the root, and diminishing their Angles with
their altitude: Verified also in lesser Plants, whereby they better
support themselves, and bear not so heavily upon the stalk: So that
while near the root they often make an Angle of seventy parts, the
sprouts near the top will often come short of thirty. Even in the nerves
and master veines of the leaves the acute angle ruleth; the obtuse but
seldome found, and in the backward part of the leaf, reflecting and
arching about the stalk. But why ofttimes one side of the leaf is
unequal unto the other, as in Hazell and Oaks, why on either side the
master vein the lesser and derivative channels stand not directly
opposite, nor at equal angles, respectively unto the adverse side, but
those of one part do often exceed the other, as the Wallnut and many
more, deserves another enquiry.

Now if for this order we affect coniferous and tapering Trees,
particularly the Cypresse, which grows in a conical figure; we have
found a tree not only of great Ornament, but in its Essentials of
affinity unto this order. A solid Rhombus being made by the conversion
of two Equicrural Cones, as _Archimedes_ hath defined. And these were
the common Trees about _Babylon_, and the East, whereof the Ark was
made; and _Alexander_ found no Trees so accommodable to build his Navy;
And this we rather think to be the tree mentioned in the Canticles,
which stricter Botanology will hardly allow to be Camphire.

And if delight or ornamentall view invite a comely disposure by circular
amputations, as is elegantly performed in Hawthorns; then will they
answer the figures made by the conversion of a Rhombus, which maketh two
concentrical Circles; the greater circumference being made by the lesser
angles, the lesser by the greater.

The Cylindrical figure of trees is virtually contained and latent in
this order. A Cylinder or long round being made by the conversion or
turning of a Parallelogram, and most handsomely by a long square, which
makes an equal, strong, and lasting figure in trees, agreeable unto the
body and motive parts of animals, the greatest number of Plants, and
almost all roots, though their stalks be angular, and of many corners,
which seem not to follow the figure of their Seeds; Since many angular
Seeds send forth round stalks, and sphaericall seeds arise from angular
spindles, and many rather conform unto their roots, as the round stalks
of bulbous Roots, and in tuberous Roots stemmes of like figure. But why
since the largest number of Plants maintain a circular Figure, there are
so few with teretous or long round leaves; why coniferous Trees are
tenuifolious or narrow leafed, why Plants of few or no joynts have
commonly round stalks, why the greatest number of hollow stalks are
round stalks; or why in this variety of angular stalks the quadrangular
most exceedeth, were too long a speculation; Mean while obvious
experience may finde, that in Plants of divided leaves above, nature
often beginneth circularly in the two first leaves below, while in the
singular plant of Ivy, she exerciseth a contrary Geometry, and beginning
with angular leaves below, rounds them in the upper branches.

Nor can the rows in this order want delight, as carrying an aspect
answerable unto the _dipteros hypoethros_, or double order of columns
open above; the opposite ranks of Trees standing like pillars in the
_Cavedia_ of the Courts of famous buildings, and the _Portico's_ of the
_Templa subdialia_ of old; Somewhat imitating the _Peristylia_ or
Cloyster buildings, and the _Exedrae_ of the Ancients, wherein men
discoursed, walked and exercised; For that they derived the rule of
Columnes from trees, especially in their proportionall diminutions, is
illustrated by _Vitruvius_ from the shafts of Firre and Pine. And though
the inter-arboration do imitate the _Areostylos_, or thin order, not
strictly answering the proportion of intercolumniations; yet in many
trees they will not exceed the intermission of the Columnes in the court
of the Tabernacle; which being an hundred cubits long, and made up by
twenty pillars, will afford no lesse then intervals of five cubits.

Beside, in this kinde of aspect the sight being not diffused but
circumscribed between long parallels and the +episkiasmos+ and
adumbration from the branches, it frameth a penthouse over the eye, and
maketh a quiet vision: And therefore in diffused and open aspects, men
hollow their hand above their eye, and make an artificiall brow, whereby
they direct the dispersed rayes of sight, and by this shade preserve a
moderate light in the chamber of the eye; keeping the _pupilla_ plump
and fair, and not contracted or shrunk as in light and vagrant vision.

And therefore providence hath arched and paved the great house of the
world, with colours of mediocrity, that is, blew and green, above and
below the sight, moderately terminating the _acies_ of the eye. For most
plants, though green above-ground, maintain their original white below
it, according to the candour of their seminall pulp, and the rudimental
leaves do first appear in that colour; observable in Seeds sprouting in
water upon their first foliation. Green seeming to be the first
supervenient, or above-ground complexion of Vegetables, separable in
many upon ligature or inhumation, as Succory, Endive, Artichoaks, and
which is also lost upon fading in the Autumn.

And this is also agreeable unto water it self, the alimental vehicle of
plants, which first altereth into this colour; And containing many
vegetable seminalities, revealeth their Seeds by greennesse; and
therefore soonest expected in rain or standing water, not easily found
in distilled or water strongly boiled; wherein the seeds are
extinguished by fire and decoction, and therefore last long and pure
without such alteration, affording neither uliginous coats, gnatworms,
Acari, hairworms, like crude and common water; And therefore most fit
for wholsome beverage, and with malt makes Ale and Beer without boyling.
What large water-drinkers some Plants are, the Canary-tree and Birches
in some Northern Countries, drenching the fields about them do
sufficiently demonstrate. How water it self is able to maintain the
growth of Vegetables, and without extinction of their generative or
medicall vertues; Beside the experiment of _Helmonts_ tree, we have
found in some which have lived six years in glasses. The seeds of
Scurvy-grasse growing in water-pots, have been fruitful in the Land;
and _Asarum_ after a years space, and once casting its leaves in water
in the second leaves, hath handsomely performed its vomiting operation.

Nor are only dark and green colours, but shades and shadows contrived
through the great Volume of nature, and trees ordained not only to
protect and shadow others, but by their shades and shadowing parts, to
preserve and cherish themselves. The whole radiation or branchings
shadowing the stock and the root, the leaves, the branches and fruit,
too much exposed to the windes and scorching Sunne. The calicular leaves
inclose the tender flowers, and the flowers themselves lye wrapt about
the seeds, in their rudiment and first formations, which being advanced
the flowers fall away; and are therefore contrived in variety of
Figures, best satisfying the intention; Handsomely observable in hooded
and gaping flowers, and the Butterfly bloomes of leguminous plants, the
lower leaf closely involving the rudimental Cod, and the alary or wingy
divisions embracing or hanging over it.

But Seeds themselves do lie in perpetual shades, either under the leaf,
or shut up in coverings; and such as lye barest, have their husks,
skins, and pulps about them, wherein the nebbe and generative particle
lyeth moist and secured from the injury of Aire and Sunne. Darknesse and
light hold interchangeable dominions, and alternately rule the seminal
state of things. Light unto _Pluto_[166] is darknesse unto _Jupiter_.
Legions of seminall _Idaea's_ lye in their second Chaos and _Orcus_ of
_Hippocrates_; till putting on the habits of their forms, they shew
themselves upon the stage of the world, and open dominion of _Jove_.
They that held the Stars of heaven were but rayes and flashing glimpses
of the Empyreall light, through holes and perforations of the upper
heaven, took of the natural shadows of stars, while according to better
discovery the poor Inhabitants of the Moon[167] have but a polary life,
and must passe half their dayes in the shadow of that Luminary.

  [166] Lux orco, tenebrae Jovi, tenebrae orco, lux Jovi. _Hippocr._ de
        diaeta.

  [167] S. Hevelii Selenographia.

Light that makes things seen, makes some things invisible, were it not
for darknesse and the shadow of the earth, the noblest part of the
Creation had remained unseen, and the Stars in heaven as invisible as on
the fourth day, when they were created above the Horizon, with the Sun,
or there was not an eye to behold them. The greatest mystery of Religion
is expressed by adumbration, and in the noblest part of Jewish Types, we
finde the Cherubims shadowing the Mercy-seat: Life it self is but the
shadow of death, and souls departed but the shadows of the living: All
things fall under this name. The Sunne it self is but the dark
_simulachrum_, and light but the shadow of God.

Lastly, It is no wonder that this Quincunciall order was first and still
affected as gratefull unto the Eye: For all things are seen
Quincuncially; For at the eye the Pyramidal rayes from the object,
receive a decussation, and so strike a second base upon the _Retina_ or
hinder coat, the proper organ of Vision; wherein the pictures from
objects are represented, answerable to the paper, or wall in the dark
chamber; after the decussation of the rayes at the hole of the
hornycoat, and their refraction upon the Christalline humour, answering
the _foramen_ of the window, and the _convex_ or burning-glasses, which
refract the rayes that enter it. And if ancient Anatomy would hold, a
like disposure there was of the optick or visual nerves in the brain,
wherein Antiquity conceived a concurrence by decussation. And this not
only observable in the Laws of direct Vision, but in some part also
verified in the reflected rayes of sight. For making the angle of
incidence equal to that of reflexion, the visuall ray returneth
Quincuncially, and after the form of a V, and the line of reflexion
being continued unto the place of vision, there ariseth a
semi-decussation which makes the object seen in a perpendicular unto it
self, and as farre below the reflectent, as it is from it above,
observable in the Sun and Moon beheld in water.

And this is also the law of reflexion in moved bodies and sounds, which
though not made by decussation, observe the rule of equality between
incidence and reflexion; whereby whispering places are framed by
Elliptical arches laid side-wise; where the voice being delivered at the
_focus_ of one extremity, observing an equality unto the angle of
incidence, it will reflect unto the _focus_ of the other end, and so
escape the ears of the standers in the middle.

A like rule is observed in the reflection of the vocall and sonorous
line in Ecchoes, which cannot therefore be heard in all stations. But
hapning in woody plantations, by waters, and able to return some words;
if reacht by a pleasant and well-dividing voice, there may be heard the
softest notes in nature.

And this not only verified in the way of sense, but in animall and
intellectual receptions. Things entring upon the intellect by a Pyramid
from without, and thence into the memory by another from within, the
common decussation being in the understanding as is delivered by
_Bovillus_.[168] Whether the intellectual and phantastical lines be not
thus rightly disposed, but magnified, diminished, distorted, and ill
placed in the Mathematicks of some brains, whereby they have irregular
apprehensions of things, perverted notions, conceptions, and incurable
hallucinations, were no unpleasant speculation.

  [168] Car. Bovillus de intellectu.

And if AEgyptian Philosophy may obtain, the scale of influences was thus
disposed, and the geniall spirits of both worlds, do trace their way in
ascending and descending Pyramids, mystically apprehended in the Letter
X, and the open Bill and stradling Legges of a Stork, which was imitated
by that Character.

Of this Figure _Plato_ made choice to illustrate the motion of the soul,
both of the world and man; while he delivered that God divided the whole
conjunction length-wise, according to figure of a Greek X, and then
turning it about reflected it into a circle; By the circle implying the
uniform motion of the first Orb, and by the right lines, the planetical
and various motions within it. And this also with application unto the
soul of man, which hath a double aspect, one right, whereby it beholdeth
the body, and objects without; another circular and reciprocal, whereby
it beholdeth it self. The circle declaring the motion of the indivisible
soul, simple, according to the divinity of its nature, and returning
into it self; the right lines respecting the motion pertaining unto
sense, and vegetation, and the central decussation, the wonderous
connexion of the severall faculties conjointly in one substance. And so
conjoyned the unity and duality of the soul, and made out the three
substances so much considered by him; That is, the indivisible or
divine, the divisible or corporeal, and that third, which was the
_Systasis_ or harmony of those two, in the mystical decussation.

And if that were clearly made out which _Justin Martyr_ took for
granted, this figure hath had the honour to characterise and notifie our
blessed Saviour, as he delivereth in that borrowed expression from
_Plato: Decussavit eum in universo_, the hint whereof he would have
_Plato_ derive from the figure of the brazen Serpent, and to have
mistaken the Letter X for T, whereas it is not improbable, he learned
these and other mystical expressions in his Learned Observations of
AEgypt, where he might obviously behold the Mercurial characters, the
handed crosses, and other mysteries not throughly understood in the
sacred Letter X, which being derivative from the Stork, one of the ten
sacred animals, might be originally AEgyptian, and brought into _Greece_
by _Cadmus_ of that Countrey.




CHAPTER V


To enlarge this contemplation unto all the mysteries and secrets,
accommodable unto this number, were inexcusable Pythagorisme, yet cannot
omit the ancient conceit of five surnamed the number of justice[169]; as
justly dividing between the digits, and hanging in the centre of Nine,
described by square numeration, which angularly divided will make the
decussated number; and so agreeable unto the Quincunciall Ordination,
and rowes divided by Equality, and just _decorum_, in the whole
complantation; And might be the Originall of that common game among us,
wherein the fifth place is Soveraigne, and carrieth the chief intention.
The Ancients wisely instructing youth, even in their recreations unto
virtue, that is, early to drive at the middle point and Central Seat of
justice.

  [169] +dike+
        . . .
        . . .
        . . .

Nor can we omit how agreeable unto this number an handsome division is
made in Trees and Plants, since _Plutarch_ and the Ancients have named
it the Divisive Number, justly dividing the Entities of the world, many
remarkable things in it, and also comprehending the generall[170]
division of Vegetables. And he that considers how most blossomes of
Trees, and greatest number of Flowers, consist of five Leaves; and
therein doth rest the setled rule of nature; So that in those which
exceed there is often found, or easily made a variety; may readily
discover how nature rests in this number, which is indeed the first rest
and pause of numeration in the fingers, the natural Organs thereof. Nor
in the division of the feet of perfect animals doth nature exceed this
account. And even in the joynts of feet, which in birds are most
multiplied, surpasseth not this number; So progressionally making them
out in many, that from five in the foreclaw she descendeth unto two in
the hindemost. And so in fower feet makes up the number of joynts, in
the five fingers or toes of man.

[170] +Dendron, Thamnos, Phryganon, Poa+, Arbor, frutex, suffrutex,
      herba, _and that fifth which comprehendeth the_ fungi _and_
      tubera, _whether to be named_ +Aschion+ _or_ +gymnon+,
      _comprehending also_ conserva marina salsa, _and Sea-cords, of so
      many yards length_.

Not to omit the Quintuple Section of a Cone,[171] of handsome practise
in Ornamentall Garden-plots, and in some way discoverable in so many
works of Nature; In the leaves, fruits, and seeds of Vegetables, and
scales of some Fishes, so much considerable in glasses, and the optick
doctrine; wherein the learned may consider the Crystalline humour of the
eye in the cuttle-fish and _Loligo_.

  [171] Elleipsis, parabola, Hyperbole, Circulus, Triangulum.

He that forgets not how Antiquity named this the Conjugall or wedding
Number, and made it the Embleme of the most remarkable conjunction, will
conceive it duely appliable unto this handsome Oeconomy, and vegetable
combination; May hence apprehend the allegoricall sence of that obscure
expression of _Hesiod_,[172] and afford no improbable reason why _Plato_
admitted his Nuptiall guests by fives, in the kindred of the
married[173] couple.

  [172] +pemptas+ id est nuptias multas. _Rhodig._

  [173] _Plato_ de leg. 6.

And though a sharper mystery might be implied in the Number of the five
wise and foolish Virgins, which were to meet the Bridegroom, yet was the
same agreeable unto the Conjugall Number, which ancient Numerists made
out by two and three, the first parity and imparity, the active and
passive digits, the materiall and formall principles in generative
Societies. And not discordant even from the customes of the _Romans_,
who admitted but five[174] Torches in their Nuptiall Solemnities.
Whether there were any mystery or not implied, the most generative
animals were created on this day, and had accordingly the largest
benediction; And under a Quintuple consideration, wanton Antiquity
considered the Circumstances of generation, while by this number of five
they naturally divided the Nectar of the fifth Planet.

  [174] Plutarch problem. Rom. 1.

The same number in the Hebrew Mysteries and Cabalistical Accounts was
the Character[175] of Generation; declared by the Letter _He_, the fifth
in their Alphabet; According to that Cabalisticall _Dogma_: If _Abram_
had not had this Letter added unto his Name, he had remained fruitlesse,
and without the power of Generation: Not onely because hereby the number
of his Name attained two hundred fourty eight, the number of the
affirmative precepts, but because as in created natures there is a male
and female, so in divine and intelligent productions, the mother of Life
and Fountain of souls in Cabalisticall Technology is called _Binah_;
whose Seal and Character was _He._ So that being sterill before, he
received the power of generation from that measure and mansion in the
Archetype; and was made conformable unto _Binah._ And upon such involved
considerations, the ten[176] of _Sarai_ was exchanged into five. If any
shall look upon this as a stable number, and fitly appropriable unto
Trees, as Bodies of Rest and Station, he hath herein a great Foundation
in nature, who observing much variety in legges and motive Organs of
Animals, as two, four, six, eight, twelve, fourteen, and more, hath
passed over five and ten, and assigned them unto none.[177] And for the
stability of this Number, he shall not want the sphericity of its
nature, which multiplied in it self, will return into its own
denomination, and bring up the reare of the account. Which is also one
of the Numbers that makes up the mysticall Name of God, which consisting
of Letters denoting all the sphaericall Numbers, ten, five, and six;
Emphatically sets forth the notion of _Trismegistus_, and that
intelligible Sphear which is the Nature of God.

  [175] Archang. dog. Cabal.

  [176] Jod _into_ He.

  [177] Or very few, as the _Phalangium monstrosum Brasilianum, Clusii et
        Jac de Laet. Cur. poster. Americae, Descript._ If perfectly
        described.

Many Expressions by this Number occurre in Holy Scripture, perhaps
unjustly laden with mysticall Expositions, and little concerning our
order. That the Israelites were forbidden to eat the fruit of their new
planted Trees, before the fifth yeare, was very agreeable unto the
naturall Rules of Husbandry; Fruits being unwholsome, and lash, before
the fourth, or fifth Yeare. In the second day or Feminine part of five,
there was added no approbation. For in the third or masculine day, the
same is twice repeated; and a double benediction inclosed both
Creations, whereof the one in some part was but an accomplishment of the
other. That the Trespasser[178] was to pay a fifth part above the head
or principall, makes no secret in this Number, and implied no more then
one part above the principall; which being considered in four parts, the
additionall forfeit must bear the Name of a fift. The five golden mice
had plainly their determination from the number of the Princes; That
five should put to flight an hundred might have nothing mystically
implyed; considering a rank of Souldiers could scarce consist of a
lesser number. Saint _Paul_ had rather speak five words in a known then
ten thousand in an unknown tongue: That is as little as could well be
spoken. A simple proposition consisting of three words, and a complexed
one, not ordinarily short of five.

  [178] Lev. 6.

More considerable there are in this mysticall account, which we must not
insist on. And therefore why the radicall Letters in the Pentateuch
should equall the number of the Souldiery of the Tribes; Why our Saviour
in the Wildernesse fed five thousand persons with five Barley Loaves,
and again, but four thousand with no lesse then seven of Wheat? Why
_Joseph_ designed five changes of Rayment unto _Benjamin_? and _David_
took just five pibbles[179] out of the Brook against the Pagan Champion?
We leave it unto Arithmeticall Divinity, and Theologicall explanation.

  [179] +tessara en ke+ _four and one, or five_. Scalig.

Yet if any delight in new Problemes, or think it worth the enquiry,
whether the Criticall Physician hath rightly hit the nominall notation
of Quinque; Why the Ancients mixed five or three but not four parts of
water unto their Wine: And _Hippocrates_ observed a fifth proportion in
the mixture of water with milk, as in _Dysenteries_ and bloudy fluxes.
Under what abstruse foundation Astrologers do figure the good or bad
Fate from our Children, in good Fortune,[180] or the fifth house of
their Celestial Schemes. Whether the AEgyptians described a Starre by a
Figure of five points, with reference unto the five[181] Capitall
aspects, whereby they transmit their Influences, or abstruser
Considerations? Why the Cabalisticall Doctors, who conceive the whole
_Sephiroth_, or divine Emanations to have guided the ten-stringed Harp
of _David_, whereby he pacified the evil spirit of _Saul_, in strict
numeration doe begin with the Perihypate Meson, or ff fa ut, and so
place the Tiphereth answering C sol fa ut, upon the fifth string: Or
whether this number be oftner applied unto bad things and ends, then
good in holy Scripture, and why? He may meet with abstrusities of no
ready resolution.

  [180] +Agathe tyche+, _or_ bona fortuna _the name of the fifth house_.

  [181] _Conjunct, opposite, sextile, trigonal, tetragonal._

If any shall question the rationality of that Magick, in the cure of the
blinde man by _Serapis_, commanded to place five fingers on his Altar,
and then his hand on his Eyes? Why since the whole Comoedy is
primarily and naturally comprised in four[182] parts; and Antiquity
permitted not so many persons to speak in one Scene, yet would not
comprehend the same in more or lesse then five acts? Why amongst
Sea-starres nature chiefly delighteth in five points? And since there
are found some of no fewer then twelve, and some of seven and nine,
there are few or none discovered of six or eight? If any shall enquire
why the Flowers of Rue properly consist of four Leaves, The first and
third Flower have five? Why since many Flowers have one leaf or
none,[183] as _Scaliger_ will have it, diverse three, and the greatest
number consist of five divided from their bottomes; there are yet so few
of two: or why nature generally beginning or setting out with two
opposite leaves at the Root, doth so seldome conclude with that order
and number at the Flower? he shall not passe his hours in vulgar
speculations.

  [182] +Protasis, epitasis, katastasis, katastrophe+.

  [183] Unifolium nullifolima.

If any shall further quaery why magneticall Philosophy excludeth
decussations, and needles transversly placed do naturally distract their
verticities. Why Geomancers do imitate the Quintuple Figure, in their
Mother Characters of Acquisition and Amission, _etc._ somewhat answering
the Figures in the Lady or speckled Beetle? With what Equity,
Chiromantical conjecturers decry these decussations in the Lines and
Mounts of the hand? What that decussated Figure intendeth in the medall
of _Alexander_ the Great? Why the Goddesses sit commonly crosse-legged
in ancient draughts, Since _Juno_ is described in the same as a
venefical posture to hinder the birth of _Hercules_? If any shall doubt
why at the Amphidromicall Feasts, on the fifth day after the Childe was
born, presents were sent from friends, of _Polipusses_, and Cuttle
fishes? Why five must be only left in that Symbolicall mutiny among the
men of _Cadmus_? Why _Proteus_ in _Homer_ the Symbole of the first
matter, before he setled himself in the midst of his Sea-Monsters, doth
place them out by fives? Why the fifth years Oxe was acceptable
Sacrifice unto _Jupiter_? Or why the Noble _Antoninus_ in some sence
doth call the soul it self a Rhombus? He shall not fall on trite or
triviall disquisitions. And these we invent and propose unto acuter
enquirers, nauseating crambe verities and questions over-queried. Flat
and flexible truths are beat out by every hammer; But _Vulcan_ and his
whole forge sweat to work out _Achilles_ his armour. A large field is
yet left unto sharper discerners to enlarge upon this order, to search
out the _quaternio's_ and figured draughts of this nature, and
moderating the study of names, and meer nomenclature of plants, to erect
generalities, disclose unobserved proprieties, not only in the
vegetable shop, but the whole volume of nature; affording delightfull
Truths, confirmable by sense and ocular Observation, which seems to me
the surest path, to trace the Labyrinth of truth. For though discursive
enquiry and rationall conjecture, may leave handsome gashes and
flesh-wounds; yet without conjunction of this expect no mortal or
dispatching blows unto errour.

But the Quincunx[184] of Heaven runs low, and 'tis time to close the
five ports of knowledge; We are unwilling to spin out our awaking
thoughts into the phantasmes of sleep, which often continueth
praecogitations; making Cables of Cobwebbes and Wildernesses of handsome
Groves. Beside _Hippocrates_[185] hath spoke so little and the
Oneirocriticall Masters,[186] have left such frigid Interpretations from
plants, that there is little encouragement to dream of Paradise it self.
Nor will the sweetest delight of Gardens afford much comfort in sleep;
wherein the dulnesse of that sense shakes hands with delectable odours;
and though in the Bed[187] of _Cleopatra_, can hardly with any delight
raise up the ghost of a Rose.

  [184] Hyades _near the Horizon about midnight, at that time._

  [185] De insomniis.

  [186] Artemodorus et Apomazar.

  [187] _Strewed with roses._

Night, which Pagan Theology could make the daughter of _Chaos_, affords
no advantage to the description of order: Although no lower then that
Masse can we derive its Genealogy. All things began in order, so shall
they end, and so shall they begin again; according to the ordainer of
order and mystical Mathematicks of the City of heaven.

Though _Somnus_ in _Homer_ be sent to rowse up _Agamemnon_, I finde no
such effects in the drowsy approaches of sleep. To keep our eyes open
longer were but to act our _Antipodes_. The Huntsmen are up in
_America_, and they are already past their first sleep in _Persia_. But
who can be drowsie at that howr which freed us from everlasting sleep?
or have slumbring thoughts at that time, when sleep it self must end,
and as some conjecture all shall awake again?

                            _FINIS_

